Main 
Pathology is the cornerstone of modern medicine and, in particular, cancer care. The pathologist's diagnosis on glass slides is the basis for clinical and pharmaceutical research and, more importantly, for the decision on how to treat the patient. Nevertheless, the standard practice of microscopy for diagnosis, grading and staging of cancer has remained nearly unchanged for a century1,2 . While other medical disciplines, such as radiology, have a long history of research and clinical application of computational approaches, pathology has remained in the background of the digital revolution. Only in recent years has digital pathology emerged as a potential new standard of care where glass slides are digitized into whole slide images (WSIs) using digital slide scanners. As scanner technologies have become more reliable, and WSIs increasingly available in larger numbers, the field of computational pathology has emerged to facilitate computer-assisted diagnostics and to enable a digital workflow for pathologists3-5 . These diagnostic decision support tools can be developed to empower pathologists' efficiency and accuracy to ultimately provide better patient care. 
Traditionally, predictive models used in decision support systems for medical image analysis relied on manually engineered feature extraction based on expert knowledge. These approaches were intrinsically domain specific and their performance was, in general, not sufficient for clinical applications. This approach was changed in recent years based on the enormous success and advancement of deep learning6 in solving image classification tasks, such as classification and categorization on ImageNet7-10 , where high-capacity deep neural network models have been reported to surpass human performance10 . 
The medical image analysis field has seen widespread application of deep learning, showing in some cases that clinical impact can be achieved for diagnostic tasks. Notably, ref. 11 reported dermatologist-level diagnosis of dermoscopy images, while ref. 12 showed ophthalmologist-level performance on optical coherence tomography images. 
Computational pathology, compared with other fields, has to face additional challenges related to the nature of pathology data generation. The lack of large annotated datasets is even more severe than in other domains. This is due in part to the novelty of digital pathology and the high cost associated with the digitization of glass slides. Furthermore, pathology images are tremendously large: glass slides scanned at 20× magnification (0.5 [micro]m pixel-1 ) produce image files of several gigapixels; about 470 WSIs contain roughly the same number of pixels as the entire ImageNet dataset. Leveraging the peculiarity of pathology datasets has led most efforts in computational pathology to apply supervised learning for classifying small tiles within a WSI13-22 . This usually requires extensive annotations at the pixel level by expert pathologists. For these reasons, state-of-the-art pathology datasets are small and heavily curated. The CAMELYON16 challenge for breast cancer metastasis detection23 contains one of the largest labeled datasets in the field, with a total of 400 non-exhaustively annotated WSIs. 
Applying deep learning for supervised classification on these small datasets has achieved encouraging results. Of note, the CAMELYON16 challenge reported performance on par with that of pathologists in discerning between benign tissue and metastatic breast cancer23 . Yet, the applicability of these models in clinical practice remains in question because of the wide variance of clinical samples that is not captured in small datasets. Experiments presented in this article will substantiate this claim. 
To properly address the shortcomings of current computational approaches and enable clinical deployment of decision support tools requires training and validation of models on large-scale datasets representative of the wide variability of cases encountered every day in the clinic. At that scale, reliance on expensive and time-consuming, manual annotations is impossible. We address all of these issues by collecting a large computational pathology dataset and by proposing a new framework for training classification models at a very large scale without the need for pixel-level annotations. Furthermore, in light of the results we present in this work, we will formalize the concept of clinical-grade decision support systems, proposing--in contrast with the existing literature--a new measure for clinical applicability. 
One of the main contributions of this work is the scale at which we learn classification models. We collected three datasets in the field of computational pathology: (1) a prostate core biopsy dataset consisting of 24,859 slides; (2) a skin dataset of 9,962 slides; and (3) a breast metastasis to lymph nodes dataset of 9,894 slides. Each of these datasets is at least one order of magnitude larger than all other datasets in the field. To put this in the context of other computer vision problems, we analyzed an equivalent number of pixels to 88 ImageNet datasets (Fig. 1a). It is important to stress that the data were not curated. The slides collected for each tissue type represent the equivalent of at least 1 year of clinical cases and are thus representative of slides generated in a true pathology laboratory, including common artifacts, such as air bubbles, microtomy knife slicing irregularities, fixation problems, cautery, folds and cracks, as well as digitization artifacts, such as striping and blurred regions. Across the three tissue types, we included 17,661 external slides, which were produced in the pathology laboratories of their respective institutions within the United States and another 44 countries (Extended Data Fig. 1), illustrating the unprecedented technical variability included in a computational pathology study. 
The datasets chosen represent different but complementary views of clinical practice, and offer insight into the types of challenges a flexible and robust decision support system should be able to solve. Prostate cancer is the leading source of new cancer cases and the second most frequent cause of death among men after lung cancers24 . Multiple studies have shown that prostate cancer diagnosis has a high inter- and intraobserver variability25-27 and is frequently based on the presence of very small lesions that comprise <1% of the entire tissue surface area (Fig. 1b). Making diagnosis more reproducible and aiding in the diagnosis of cases with low tumor volume are examples of how decision support systems can improve patient care. The skin cancer basal cell carcinoma (BCC) rarely causes metastases or death 28 . In its most common form (nodular), pathologists can readily identify and diagnose the lesion. With approximately 4.3 million individuals diagnosed annually in the United States29 , it is the most common form of cancer. In this scenario, a decision support system should increase clinical efficiency by streamlining the work of the pathologist. 
To fully leverage the scale of our datasets, it is unfeasible to rely on supervised learning, which requires manual annotations. Instead, we propose to use the slide-level diagnosis, which is readily available from anatomic pathology laboratory information systems (LISs) or electronic health records, to train a classification model in a weakly supervised manner. Crucially, diagnostic data retrieved from pathology reports are easily scalable, as opposed to expert annotation for supervised learning, which is time prohibitive at scale. To be more specific, the slide-level diagnosis casts a weak label on all tiles within a particular WSI. In addition, we know that if the slide is negative, all of its tiles must also be negative and not contain tumor. In contrast, if the slide is positive, it must be true that at least one of all of the possible tiles contains tumor. This formalization of the WSI classification problem is an example of the general standard multiple instance assumption, for which a solution was first described in ref. 30 . Multiple instance learning (MIL) has since been widely applied in many machine learning domains, including computer vision31-34 . 
Current methods for weakly supervised WSI classification rely on deep learning models trained under variants of the MIL assumption. Typically, a two-step approach is used, where first a classifier is trained with MIL at the tile level and then the predicted scores for each tile within a WSI are aggregated, usually by combining (pooling) their results with various strategies35 , or by learning a fusion model36 . Inspired by these works, we developed a novel framework that leverages MIL to train deep neural networks, resulting in a semantically rich tile-level feature representation. These representations are then used in a recurrent neural network (RNN) to integrate the information across the whole slide and report the final classification result (Fig. 1c,d). 
