Introduction 
The concept of synthetic lethality was introduced almost 100 years ago by the Drosophila melanogaster geneticist Calvin Bridges1 and was named by Theodor Dobzhansky in 1946 (ref.2 ). Synthetic lethality describes the situation in a cell or organism whereby a defect in either one of two genes has little or no effect but the combination of defects in both genes results in sickness (synthetic sickness) or even death (synthetic lethality)3 (Fig. 1). This paradigm has been extensively studied by geneticists and developmental biologists, but it was an article by Hartwell and colleagues 4 , subsequently highlighted by Kaelin5 , Brummelkamp, Bernards6 and others, that fuelled interest in using the concept of synthetic lethality to develop cancer therapeutics. Synthetic lethal interactions are a form of context-dependent essentiality7 , in which a genetic alteration, such as a defect in a tumour suppressor gene (the context), causes a second gene to become essential for cell survival; pharmacological inhibition of the product of this second, synthetic lethal gene would, in principle, be lethal to tumour cells but leave nonmalignant cells largely unaffected. Therefore, synthetic lethality provides an approach that can be used to selectively target tumour cells and spare the patient's nonmalignant cells. Furthermore, application of the synthetic lethality principle raises the possibility of precisely targeting subgroups of cancers that are defined by a known molecular change, such as a cancer driver mutation. As our understanding of the genetic alterations in cancer has developed, the synthetic lethal concept has been expanded to include a number of other related genetic concepts, such as induced essentiality 8 , collateral sensitivity9,10 , and synthetic dosage lethality, a term that defines the situation in which elevated activity of a gene (as opposed to loss) renders another gene essential. 
The poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase 1 (PARP1) and PARP2 enzymes are important sensors of DNA damage that bind to single-stranded DNA breaks and other types of DNA damage and subsequently act as signal transducers in the DNA-damage response (DDR) pathway. Upon binding with DNA, PARP1 and PARP2 post-translationally modify substrate proteins by synthesizing poly(ADP-ribose) (PAR) chains in a process known as poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation (PARylation). Considerable research efforts over many years have led to the discovery and development of small-molecule PARP inhibitors, some of which have entered the clinic11 . In 2005, two research groups12,13 discovered a synthetic lethal interaction between PARP inhibition and mutations in BRCA1 or BRCA2 . 
BRCA1 and BRCA2 are tumour suppressor genes that, when heterozygously mutated in the germ line, confer a considerably higher risk of several forms of cancer including breast, ovarian, pancreatic and prostate cancer. Functional BRCA1 and BRCA2 proteins are crucial to the repair of double-stranded DNA breaks by homologous recombination (HR)11 . Tumours that arise in individuals with a germline BRCA mutation frequently harbour a somatic loss-of-function aberration in the corresponding wild-type BRCA allele and therefore have defective HR. The synthetic lethal interaction between PARP inhibition and loss of BRCA function is thought to be related to an increased number of double-strand DNA breaks or collapsed replication forks induced by PARP inhibition or PARP trapping on DNA. Importantly, the magnitude of the synthetic lethal effect observed in preclinical models of BRCA -mutant cancer was substantial, an observation that encouraged the translation of this approach into clinical trials11 . 
Initial observations in phase I/Ib clinical studies and then in phase II trials demonstrated the initial proof of concept of the validity of the synthetic lethality approach, with patients with various BRCA -mutant cancers having a profound and sustained response to the PARP inhibitor olaparib14-16 . The findings of subsequent trials confirmed these promising results, and the FDA has now approved three PARP inhibitors for clinical use in patients with BRCA -mutant ovarian cancer: olaparib, rucaparib, and niraparib11 . Olaparib has now also been approved by the FDA for the treatment of patients with BRCA -mutated breast cancer (Table 1). 
FDA-approved PARP inhibitors 
Agent	Clinical trials	FDA approvals
Olaparib 	Study 19 (ref.134 ), OlympiAD135 	* Ovarian cancer: for the maintenance treatment of adult patients with recurrent epithelial ovarian, fallopian tube, or primary peritoneal cancer who have an ongoing complete or partial response to platinum-based chemotherapy 
* Ovarian cancer: for the treatment of adult patients with deleterious or suspected deleterious germline BRCA- mutant advanced-stage ovarian cancer who have received three or more prior lines of chemotherapy. Patients are selected for treatment on the basis of an FDA-approved companion diagnostic that enables the identification of deleterious germline BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations 
* Breast cancer: for the treatment of patients with deleterious or suspected deleterious germline BRCA- mutated, HER2-negative metastatic breast cancer who have been treated with chemotherapy in the neoadjuvant, adjuvant or metastatic setting. Patients with hormone receptor (HR)-positive breast cancer should have previously received, or been considered ineligible for endocrine therapy. Patients are selected for therapy on the basis of an FDA-approved companion diagnostic test that identifies deleterious germline BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations 
Rucaparib (Rubraca; Clovis (formerly Pfizer)) 	ARIEL2 (ref.136 ) 	Ovarian cancer: for the treatment of patients with deleterious BRCA -mutant (germline and/or somatic) advanced-stage ovarian cancer who have been treated with two or more prior chemotherapies. Patients are selected for therapy on the basis of an FDA-approved companion diagnostic that identifies deleterious germline BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene mutations 
Niraparib 	NOVA137 	Ovarian cancer: for the maintenance treatment of adult patients with recurrent epithelial ovarian, fallopian tube, or primary peritoneal cancer who have an ongoing complete or partial response to platinum-based chemotherapy 
PARP, poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase. 
Responses to PARP inhibitors among patients with BRCA -mutant breast or ovarian cancer were sufficiently profound to support FDA approval of these agents, although both intrinsic and acquired resistance to PARP inhibitors is common. Several mechanisms to explain both forms of resistance have been proposed, most of which centre on the restoration of HR in tumour cells, either directly through reversion mutations in BRCA1 or BRCA2 or indirectly via alterations in other components of the DDR17 . Similar to the experience with other targeted therapies, PARP inhibition also seems to result in Darwinian selection, favouring the survival and proliferation of tumour cell clones harbouring BRCA reversion mutations above those that do not18 . Considerable effort is now being directed at improving responses to PARP inhibitors, either through use of combination strategies19 or by targeting alternative pathways in BRCA -mutant tumour cells. 
The discovery and development of the first clinically approved synthetic lethal cancer therapy has fostered interest in the potential to exploit other synthetic lethal interactions. In this Review, illustrative examples of synthetic lethal interactions in diverse cellular pathways are discussed, with an emphasis on those that might eventually be clinically actionable. In addition, new technologies that might shape the discovery of additional synthetic lethal interactions are described. Finally, new directions for the field are suggested. 
Synthetic lethal interactions 
The DDR pathway 
The DDR involves a set of highly connected molecular networks that maintain genomic integrity, thus preventing the transmission of altered genetic material to daughter cells and acting as a tumour-suppressive barrier. For decades, gene perturbation studies in yeast have enabled the characterization of synthetic lethal interactions associated with genes involved in the DDR 20,21 . One common feature of these studies has been the identification of multiple synthetic lethal interactions between pairs of DDR genes, an observation that probably reflects the interaction of multiple complementary molecular processes to prevent the formation of what might otherwise be cytotoxic or fitness-impairing DNA lesions. The search for synthetic lethal interactions within the DDR has focused largely on three main aspects: additional synthetic lethal uses for PARP inhibitors, alternative ways of using synthetic lethality to target BRCA -mutant tumours that might supersede PARP inhibition or overcome resistance to PARP inhibitors and targeting synthetic lethal effects other than those involving the effects of PARP inhibition and/or BRCA mutations on DDR in tumours. 
PARP inhibition targeting BRCAness 
'BRCAness' is a term used to define a subset of tumours that lack germline BRCA mutations but share other similar characteristics, particularly defective HR, and are, therefore, phenocopies of BRCA -mutant tumours22 . Owing to defects in HR, tumours with a BRCAness phenotype might also have synthetic lethal inter-actions with PARP inhibitors, thus providing an example of pathway synthetic lethality (Fig. 2). In some respects, this hypothetical vulnerability has been shown to exist; defects in one of a number of tumour suppressor genes involved in HR and/or associated DNA repair pathways, such as ATM , ATR , and PALB2 , also cause sensitivity to PARP inhibitors in preclinical models 22,23 . Data from genetic screens have revealed the existence of additional genes that are defective in cancer, such as CDK12 , RAD51B , and RAD51C that might also confer a BRCAness phenotype20 . Indeed, widespread sequencing of human tumours has revealed that substantial proportions of high-grade serous ovarian cancers, advanced-stage castration-resistant prostate cancers, pancreatic cancers, and other cancers harbour mutations in genes that could be classified as conferring a BRCAness phenotype22,24-26 . In addition, a combination of genetic, genomic, and/or epigenetic defects in a single tumour cell could potentially cause an HR defect and BRCAness; however, the precise nature of these complex causes of BRCAness remains under investigation, as does their value in predicting clinical sensitivity to PARP inhibitors22 . 
Alternatives to PARP inhibition 
Resistance to PARP inhibition is clinically important in patients with BRCA -mutant tumours, therefore, considerable effort has been made to identify other additional synthetic lethal interactions involving BRCA that might either be superior to PARP inhibition in terms of therapeutic effect or that might enable resistance to PARP inhibitors to be overcome. Two research groups27,28 have published data suggesting that the low-fidelity DNA polymerase-[theta] (Pol[theta]; encoded by POLQ ) is a synthetic lethal target for the treatment of BRCA1 -mutated cancers. Pol[theta] is involved in a form of double-strand DNA repair, known as microhomology-mediated end joining (MMEJ); this error-prone DDR pathway requires PARP1. The survival of BRCA1-deficient cancer cells seems to be dependent on MMEJ, therefore, inhibition of Pol[theta] induces synthetic lethality. In part, this relationship might reflect the fact that Pol[theta] normally inhibits HR (perhaps by sequestration of the DNA recombinase and BRCA2-interacting protein DNA repair protein RAD51), potentially leading to an increased reliance on HR -- which is compromised in BRCA1 -mutant cells -- upon inhibition of Pol[theta]27 . Silencing of Pol[theta] enhances the effects of both PARP inhibition and DNA crosslinking agents in HR-deficient ovarian cancer cells27,28 . Thus, a number of pharmaceutical companies are currently developing Pol[theta] inhibitors. The most appropriate clinical context for the use of these agents, either superseding the use of PARP inhibitors, use in combination with PARP inhibitors, or use after resistance to PARP inhibitors has emerged, remains to be determined. 
DNA repair protein RAD52 has a number of roles in DNA repair, including a key role in the rescue of stalled replication forks29 . Silencing of RAD52 creates a synthetic lethal interaction with loss-of-function mutations in BRCA1, BRCA2 , or PALB2 (refs30-32 ). The exact mechanisms responsible for these synthetic lethal interactions remain to be fully understood, although these preclinical observations have led to efforts to develop small-molecule RAD52 inhibitors33 . Crossover junction endonuclease MUS81 activity also seems to be required for replication fork progression in BRCA2 -mutant cells. Hence, inhibitors of MUS81 nuclease activity have also been proposed to have some utility for the treatment of BRCA2-deficient cancers 34 . 
Patel and colleagues35 have shown that cells with deficiencies in Fanconi anaemia-related ( FANC ) genes are sensitive to DNA damage induced by endogenous acetaldehyde produced as a consequence of cellular metabolism. Defects in either BRCA1 or BRCA2 have also been shown to sensitize cells to acetaldehyde. Endogenous acetaldehyde is removed through the action of aldehyde dehydrogenase enzymes (ALDHs); Tacconi et al.36 found that disulfiram, an ALDH2 inhibitor, selectively inhibits the proliferation of BRCA1-deficient and BRCA2-deficient cells. Disulfiram, in the form of antabuse, is currently in widespread clinical use for the treatment of alcoholism, therefore, this work could be rapidly translated clinically. 
Targeting other DDR defects in tumours 
The success in exploiting synthetic lethality using PARP inhibitors has resulted in renewed research interest in targeting other components of the DDR as synthetic lethal approaches to treating cancer. One of the most promising targets in this regard is ATR, a protein kinase that is activated by replication protein A (RPA) upon binding to single-stranded DNA at stalled replication forks. CHK1 (also known as CHEK1) is a critical regulator of the G2-M and intra-S cell cycle checkpoints and an important substrate of ATR. A related DDR kinase, ATM, is also currently being investigated as a potential drug target. Histone H2AX is a substrate of ATM; phosphorylation of this protein within histone complexes flanking DNA double-strand breaks is an important step in facilitating the recruitment of additional DDR components. CHK2 (also known as CHEK2) has a role in the G1-S cell cycle checkpoint and is another important substrate of ATM. Potent inhibitors of ATR activity currently in clinical development include VX-970 (eight trials on clinicaltrials.gov), AZD6738 (ten trials on clinicaltrials.gov) and BAY1895344 (NCT03188965). A phase I trial involving the ATM inhibitor AZD0156 is also currently ongoing (NCT02588105). These drugs are being investigated as single agents, as well as in combination with chemotherapy, radiation therapy, PARP inhibition and/or immunotherapy. Biomarkers of a response to ATR inhibitors are currently also being explored and include ATM deficiency, mutations in genes associated with DDR pathways, and genomic alterations that induce replicative stress, including aberrations in TP53 (refs37,38 ). Mutations in the gene encoding the chromatin remodelling component AT-rich interactive domain-containing protein 1A (ARID1A ) have also been suggested to mediate sensitivity to ATR inhibitors 39 . Clinical data on the efficacy of ATR inhibitors are thus far limited, but an anecdotal complete clinical response to an ATR inhibitor has been observed in a patient with metastatic ATM-deficient colorectal cancer40 . Several other synthetic lethal interactions are currently being explored in the DDR space. One such well-validated interaction is between RAD54B deficiency in cells derived from patients with colorectal cancer and silencing of flap endonuclease FEN1 (ref.41 ). 
Epigenetic regulation 
Mutations in genes encoding proteins that add, read, or remove epigenetic modifications to DNA or histones and consequently regulate chromatin structure can be detected in up to 20% of all human malignancies42 . Most commonly, these mutations result in loss of function of genes associated with chromatin remodelling, although gain of function mutations can also occur. For example, the switch/sucrose non-fermentable (SWI/SNF) chromatin remodelling complexes BRG1-associated factor (BAF) and polybromo-associated BAF (PBAF) are composed of more than a dozen protein subunits, many of which are established tumour suppressor proteins. These SWI/SNF complexes mediate the mobilization of nucleosomes along DNA, thus enabling the regulation of gene expression and facilitating DNA replication and repair processes. Several synthetic lethal interactions have now been described for tumours harbouring deficiencies in SWI/SNF complex components, some of which are currently being tested in clinical trials42 . 
In what might be a general phenomenon related to protein complexes and synthetic lethality, loss of certain SWI/SNF subunit proteins results in a synthetic lethal inter-action with depletion of other SWI/SNF proteins. For exam-ple, loss of activity of both BAF47 (encoded by SMARCB1 ) and the ATPase protein BRG1 (encoded by SMARCA4 ) results in synthetic lethality; the inactivation of BRG1 abrogates tumorigenesis in Baf47 -deficient mice43 . Human SWI/SNF complexes contain one of two core ATPases, BRG1 or BAF190B (encoded by SMARCA2 ), which are mutually exclusive. Indeed, research by several groups has shown that aberrations in SMARCA4 and SMARCA2 are synthetic lethal, both in cell lines and in vivo, owing to an absence of ATPase activity in the SWI/SNF complex44-47 . This relationship provides one example of how defects in paralogous genes can cause synthetic lethality (Fig. 3). Notably, SMARCA2 is often mutated in human cancers, including those of the lung, pancreas, and brain48 . 
Adapted from ref.132 , Macmillan Publishers Limited. 
The BAF47 component of the SWI/SNF complex is frequently mutated in childhood malignant rhabdoid tumours, as well as in other cancers48 . The synthetic lethal interaction between BAF47 deficiency and inhibition of the polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) histone methyltransferase enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (EZH2) has particular promise in the treatment of these tumours49 . When BAF47 is deficient, EZH2 induces epigenetic silencing of the CDKN2A tumour suppressor gene, which encodes the endogenous cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 2A (also known as p16 INK4A ) and tumour suppressor ARF (also known as p14ARF ). Thus, CDKN2A is reactivated upon inhibition of EZH2, thereby suppressing cell proliferation49 . Whether or not EZH2 inhibitors have efficacy in patients with SWI/SNF-deficient cancers is now being investigated in clinical trials (for example, with the EZH2 inhibitor tazemetostat; NCT03213665). EZH2 inhibition 50,51 also has synthetic lethal interactions with loss-of-function mutations in several other SWI/SNF components, including in ARID1A , SMARCA4 , and PBRM1 . 
Deleterious mutations in ARID1A , which encodes a DNA-binding subunit of the BAF complex, are present in multiple human cancers, including those of the endometrium (21%52 ), liver (10%53 ) stomach (21%54 ), and other organs. More than half of all difficult-to-treat ovarian clear cell carcinomas carry a mutation in ARID1A 55 . Owing to the prevalence of ARID1A mutations in human cancers, several investigators have sought to identify genetic and chemical synthetic lethal partners of ARID1A . In project https://portals.broadinstitute.org/achilles , researchers identified defects in the gene encoding the paralogous DNA-binding BAF subunit AT-rich interactive domain-containing protein 1B (ARID1B) as being synthetic lethal with ARID1A defects; an absence of both paralogues was found to lead to destabilization of the SWI/SNF complex 56 (Fig. 3). ARID1A has been suggested to facilitate the maintenance of genomic stability through a role in HR following double-strand DNA breaks. As such, ARID1A-deficient cells have been reported as being modestly sensitive to PARP inhibitors in vitro57 . In addition, ARID1A deficiency has been shown to be syn-thetic lethal with inhibition of PI3K or AKT58 and also to result in sensitivity to the tyrosine-kinase inhibitor dasatinib 59 . A profound level of sensitivity of ARID1A-deficient cells to ATR inhibitors has also been described39 . Mechanistically, ARID1A deficiency results in DNA processing defects during mitosis, which cause an increased reliance upon ATR function39 . Clinical trials are currently being designed to test this hypothesis. Models of ovarian clear cell carcinoma with defects in ARID1A have also been shown to be reliant on histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6)60 . The loss of the repressive effects of ARID1A on HDAC6 transcription enables HDAC6 to deacetylate p53, thus reducing its pro-apoptotic function, an effect that is apparent in preclinical models using the HDAC inhibitor ACY1215 (ref.60 ).
Synthetic lethal relationships have been described in epigenetic regulatory pathways beyond SWI/SNF. SETD2 is a gene that encodes a histone methyltransferase that catalyses trimethylation of lysine 36 in histone H3 (H3K36me3), which is associated with heterochromatin61 . Loss-of-function mutations in SETD2 are common in clear cell renal cell carcinomas (RCCs). Inhibition of the cell cycle checkpoint kinase WEE1 has been shown to be synthetic lethal with loss-of-function SETD2 mutation. WEE1 inhibition in SETD2 -mutant cells seems to result in reduced levels of ribonucleotide-diphosphate reductase subunit M2 (RRM2) as a result of both active degradation of the RRM2 protein and reduced transcription of the RRM2 gene, leading to deoxynucleotide depletion and S phase arrest62 . 
Signal transduction pathways 
Aberrations in cell signalling occur frequently in human cancers. In particular, the RAS family of oncogenes (KRAS, NRAS , and HRAS ) includes members that are among the most common genetic drivers, being activated by mutations in approximately 20% of all cancers. Despite considerable efforts over many decades, direct inhibitors of oncogenic RAS are not yet available clinically; although, some signs are emerging that novel approaches to drug discovery might be more fruitful in this regard 63 . Owing to this lack of effective inhibitors, indirect approaches, such as the use of synthetic lethality, have been explored. Both mechanism-driven and screening-based approaches have been employed in an attempt to identify such interactions. The delineation of robust synthetic lethal effects involving oncogenic RAS has not been straightforward; although, a number of lessons have been learned that might provide a path towards identifying clinically actionable effects. Furthermore, the considerable research efforts expended in searching for RAS synthetic lethal effects has led to the establishment of certain principles that might assist in the discovery of robust synthetic lethal effects in other systems. 
Data from many synthetic lethal screens involving mutant RAS have been published. For example, an early short hairpin RNA (shRNA) screen of the kinome identified TBK1 as a KRAS synthetic lethal target64 . This inter-action seems to operate via TBK1-mediated activation of the nuclear factor-[kappa]B (NF-[kappa]B) pathway, a requirement for the survival of oncogenic KRAS -driven non-small-cell lung cancer cells. The findings of another screen identified the kinase STK33 as being a synthetic lethal partner of mutant RAS 65 . However, subsequent attempts to validate the role of STK33 have led some to conclude that the synthetic lethal interaction was not widely applicable and might be private to specific model systems66 . In general, only limited overlap has been observed between the synthetic lethal effects identified in different screens. Several possible explanations for this lack of concordance exist and have been thoughtfully discussed by Julian Downward67 . These reasons include the heterogeneity of the cellular systems (genetic background, cellular state, and histology) used; whether the effects are in 2D tissue culture rather than in vivo; differences between individual RAS mutations; and methodological differences in the statistical analysis of data obtained using high-throughput screens. The general principle established in this work, however, is that many of the synthetic lethal effects identified in individual KRAS -mutant model systems might be private to these systems; these private events are, therefore, often not apparent when assessed in a different context (such as a different model system) and are thus unlikely to be robust in the face of the considerable levels of molecular and phenotypic heterogeneity observed in human cancers3 . 
In 2017, Sabatini and colleagues68 published data from genome-wide CRISPR-Cas9 screens in 14 different acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) cell lines. The comparison of six KRAS -mutant or NRAS -mutant cell lines with six KRAS- wild-type and NRAS -wild-type cell lines enabled the identification of a small number of synthetic lethal interactions with genes involved in RAS processing (such as RCE1 and ICMT ) and MAPK signalling (such as RAF1 and SHOC2 ). These same synthetic lethal effects were reconfirmed in isogenic matched Ba/F3 cells harbouring an NRAS mutation68 . These results suggest that, at least in AML, few synthetic lethal partners of oncogenic RAS exist and that these are restricted to genes involved in RAS processing or MAPK signalling. The observation that only a few bona fide RAS synthetic lethal interactions were discovered and that these can be histology-specific might go some way to explaining why large-scale screens of hetero-geneous cell lines from multiple different cancer types have failed to identify common genes that form synthetic lethal interactions with oncogenic RAS. 
A number of other RAS synthetic lethal interactions (reviewed in 2017 (ref. 69 )) have been described with genes associated with DDR pathways70 (such as ATR71 ), cell cycle regulation (for example, CHK1 (refs72,73 )), the proteasome and proteolytic stress (such as through HSP90 inhibition 74 ) as well as with transcription factors, such as GATA2 (refs75,76 ). Whether or not agents targeting these interactions will have clinical utility remains to be seen. 
Synthetic lethal approaches have been used to investigate genes associated with signal transduction other than RAS . For example, using a mutual exclusivity approach, DePinho and colleagues 77 demonstrated that depletion of chromodomain helicase DNA-binding protein 1 (CHD1) is potentially selectively lethal to PTEN -deficient prostate and breast cancers. Wild-type PTEN promotes CHD1 degradation via the F-box/WD repeat-containing protein 1A (BTRC) mediated ubiquitylation-proteasome pathway. The absence of PTEN results in CHD1 stabilization, leading to activation of pro-tumorigenic TNF-NF-[kappa]B signalling77 . 
Metabolism 
Somatic cancer-associated mutations have been identified in genes involved in energy metabolism, opening up the possibility of targeting the rewired metabolic state of cancer cells via synthetic lethal approaches. Germline mutations in the gene encoding fumarate hydratase are associated with hereditary leiomyomatosis and renal cell carcinoma78 . Fumarate hydratase deficiency leads to the accumulation of fumarate, which activates hypoxia-inducible factors (HIFs) in the absence of hypoxia; however, how cells survive in the absence of a functional tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle (also known as the Krebs cycle) was unclear. Frezza et al. 78 used computational modelling and metabolomic profiling to identify a metabolic alteration that occurs as a consequence of fumarate hydratase deficiency. Truncation of the TCA cycle resulted in the movement of glutamine-derived carbon atoms into the haem biosynthesis and degradation pathway. As a result, fumarate hydratase 1-deficient cells were then able to use the accumulated TCA cycle metabolites to generate sufficient mitochondrial NADH. However, silencing of haem oxygenase 1, or inhibition of this enzyme using zinc protoporphyrin, resulted in selective growth impairment of fumarate hydratase 1-deficient cells compared with control cells. 
Mutations in genes that encode components of the key respiratory enzyme complex succinate dehydro-genase (SDH) are present in several rare tumours, including pheochromocytoma, paraganglioma, and gastrointestinal stromal tumours79 . Findings of mechanistic analyses suggest that mutations in SDH complex genes result in a truncated TCA cycle, which causes defective production of aspartate, a vital metabolite for nucleotide biosynthesis. SDH-mutant tumours have been demonstrated to use pyruvate and pyruvate carboxylase to sustain aspartate biosynthesis. As a consequence, SDH-mutant tumours are hypersensitive to silencing of pyruvate carboxylase expression, while non-transformed cells are able to use the canonical aspartate biosynthesis pathway80 . 
Gain-of-function mutations in two related isocitrate dehydrogenase genes ( IDH1 and IDH2 ) occur in gliomas and in AML81 . Mutations in these genes lead to the neomorphic production of the oncometabolite (R )-2-hydroxyglutarate. Inhibitors of the mutant forms of IDH1 and IDH2 have been developed and have shown efficacy in the clinic82 . In addition, studies investigating synthetic lethal approaches to the treatment of patients with IDH1 -mutant and/or IDH2 -mutant cancers have also been performed. IDH1 -mutant and/or IDH2 -mutant cells are sensitive to PARP inhibitors83,84 ; this appears to result from suppression of HR-based DNA repair by neomorphic IDH mutations, hence, sensitizing cells to PARP inhibition. Moreover, synthetic lethal relationships have been described between IDH1 and/or IDH2 and the regulators of apoptosis BCL-2 and BCL-XL in AML and glioma, respectively, likely owing to altered apoptotic thresholds85,86 . 
The von Hippel-Lindau tumour suppressor gene (VHL) is commonly mutated or promoter hypermethylated in clear cell RCC87 . VHL is an oxygen-dependent ubiquitin ligase that regulates the degradation of hypoxia-inducible factor 1[alpha] (HIF1[alpha]). In the presence of oxygen, HIF1[alpha] is hydroxylated on proline residues by Egl nine homologue (EGLN) prolyl hydroxylases and subsequently ubiquitylated by VHL. Loss of VHL activity results in dysregulated HIF1[alpha] activity, which drives the development of RCC87 . A number of synthetic lethal interactions with VHL loss have been described. Using an shRNA screen, researchers identified the histone methyltransferase EZH1 as a potential synthetic lethal partner of VHL loss; this interaction was validated by pharmacological inhibition of EZH1 (ref. 88 ). VHL loss appears to increase the requirement for EZH1 owing to the HIF-dependent increase in histone H3 lysine 27 (H3K27) demethylase activity. In addition, others using chemical screens have identified the inhibitors of autophagy glucose transporter type 1 (GLUT1) and ROCK1 as having the potential to induce synthetic lethality in VHL-related cancers89-91 . 
When tumour suppressor genes are deleted in cancer, other putative passenger genes might also be deleted, leading to vulnerabilities; the loss of such genes has been termed collateral lethality or collateral sensitivity 9,10 (Fig. 4). Three research groups separately demonstrated that deletion of the gene encoding S -methyl-5'-thioadenosine phosphorylase (MTAP) confers increased dependence on protein arginine N -methyltransferase 5 (PRMT5)92-94 . The genomic location of MTAP is adjacent to that of the tumour suppressor gene CDKN2A at chromosome 9p21.3. CDKN2A is commonly homozygously deleted in cancer, and MTAP is frequently co-deleted with CDKN2A (in approximately 15% of all cancers and >50% of glioblastomas) 95 . MTAP encodes an enzyme that cleaves methylthioadenosine, thus generating precursors for methionine and adenine synthesis. The absence of MTAP leads to the accumulation of methylthioadenosine in the cell, which leads to partial inhibition of PRMT5. As a consequence, cancers harbouring MTAP deletions are more sensitive to inhibition of PRMT5 (refs92-94 ), and several pharmaceutical companies are now developing PRMT5 inhibitors. 
Other major cancer-related genes 
Despite the considerable success in developing targeted therapies that inhibit mutated kinases in cancer, progress in developing therapies for many other genes that are frequently mutated or overexpressed in a range of cancers, such as MYC , RB1 , and TP53 , has been limited. The products of these mutated genes remain important targets of synthetic lethal approaches. 
MYC 
The MYC oncogene is dysregulated in a substantial proportion of human cancers. Three MYC family members exist: C-MYC, L-MYC and N-MYC, all of which have been linked with tumour pathogenesis and progression. The MYC proteins are transcription factors that regulate multiple cellular functions, including proliferation, growth, and metabolism97 . Considerable evidence exists that MYC is potentially an extremely important therapeutic target. However, as a transcription factor, MYC has thus far proved impossible to target directly. Therefore, a number of attempts have been made to target MYC indirectly using synthetic lethal approaches 98,99 . 
The established role of MYC in cellular proliferation has resulted in considerable interest in synthetic lethal interactions with cell cycle regulatory components; for example, small-molecule inhibition of CDK2 is synthetic lethal with MYC overexpression in cellular models100 . CDK1 inhibition, using the inhibitor purvalanol A, also induces apoptosis in cells overexpressing MYC and prolongs survival in mouse models of MYC-driven lymphoma101 . An additional link to apoptosis was provided by the finding that TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL; also known as TNFSF10) and death receptor 5 (DR5; also known as TNFRSF10B) agonists have synthetic lethal interactions with dysregulated MYC102 . 
Several other synthetic lethal interactions involving MYC have been described, such as with SUMO-activating enzyme subunit 1 (SAE1) or SAE2, enzymes involved in sumoylation, which were identified in a MYC synthetic lethal genome-wide RNA interference (RNAi) screen; in MYC-driven cells, depletion of SAE1 or SAE2 caused mitotic catastrophe103 . PIM1 was identified in a MYC synthetic lethal kinome RNAi screen and seems to inhibit the oncogenic transcriptional activity of MYC, thus restoring the activity of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p27KIP1 , a negative regulator of the cell cycle104 . Clinical-grade PIM1 inhibitors are available and, therefore, this observation could be readily tested in clinical studies. Other synthetic lethal interactions involving MYC include genes involved in pathways such as transcription105 , RNA splicing106 , and metabolism107 , among others. 
RB1 
Expression of RB is commonly lost owing to loss-of-function mutations or transcriptional silencing of RB1 in the childhood eye cancer retinoblastoma and in some forms of breast, prostate, or lung cancers, sarcomas and glioblastomas108 . The canonical role of RB is in cell cycle control and, therefore, regulation of cellular proliferation109,110 , whereby RB, together with D-type cyclins, cyclin-dependent kinases and inhibitors, RB-pocket proteins and the E2 factor (E2F) family of transcription factors, controls the progression of cells through the G1 restriction checkpoint. Several chemogenetic synthetic lethal interactions involving RB have been identified, including with topoisomerase poisons, such as etoposide; RB is thought to mediate the processing and repair of DNA damage caused by these agents by binding with both type II topoisomerases and BRCA1, thus recruiting them to the site of DNA damage111 . Several other synthetic lethal targets associated with RB defects have also been identified. Simultaneous inactivation of Rbf and the gene encoding tuberin (TSC2 ; encoded by gig in Drosophila melanogaster ) causes synthetic lethality in fruitflies, an effect that is conserved in human tumour cells112 . TSC2, together with hamartin (TSC1), forms a heterodimer that regulates mTOR signalling via transducer of regulated cAMP response element-binding protein (also known as TORC1); the synthetic lethal interaction between RB and TSC2 seems to be dependent upon dysregulation of the TORC1 effector S6 kinase and the RB-dependent E2F transcription factors112 . Similarly, upregulated WNT signalling caused, for example, by loss of APC tumour suppressor gene function, also causes synthetic lethality with RB via TORC1 dysregulation113 . Large-scale shRNA screens in human tumour cell lines demonstrated the dependency of RB-defective tumour cells on E2F family transcription factors, including transcription factor E2F3 (refs114,115 ). This observation might relate to the roles that certain E2F transcription factors have in minimizing replication stress and DNA damage in cells harbouring RB defects116,117 . Finally, combined defects in RB and p53 impart a dependency upon the RNase III enzyme endoribonuclease DICER (DICER1), which is perhaps related to the oncogenic miR-17-92 cluster118 . 
TP53 
TP53 is one the most commonly mutated tumour suppressor genes; p53 itself or regulators of p53 activity are dysfunctional in most human cancers 119 . p53 is a transcription factor activated by various cellular stresses and is a major regulator of DNA repair, cell cycle arrest, apoptosis, and metabolism 120 . Moreover, loss of p53 function by mutation affects the response to a wide range of cytotoxic chemotherapies and is associated with poor survival outcomes. These various observations have led to many efforts to restore p53 function or to inhibit aberrant p53 signalling in cancers. In addition, multiple synthetic lethal approaches to targeting p53-mutant tumours have been discovered in various cellular pathways including the DDR and those involved in metabolism and cell cycle regulation; the area of synthetic lethal interactions with mutant p53 has been extensively reviewed elsewhere 121 . 
Discovering new synthetic lethalities 
Cancer-derived cell lines cultured in vitro on plastic surfaces have been the mainstay of experimental systems designed to define new synthetic lethal relationships. For example, genome-wide RNAi screens in large panels of cancer-derived cell lines, in which the dependencies on multiple distinct genes can be established, have enabled the delineation of a 'first draft' of a comprehensive database of the synthetic lethal effects that operate in cancer cells114,115,122-124 . This large-scale mapping of synthetic lethal relationships in human cancer cells has also facilitated the more refined classification of synthetic lethal effects. For example, an analysis of synthetic lethal effects associated with 800 genes, in 400 cancer cell lines, identified 3 broad, and sometimes overlapping, classes of synthetic lethal effects122 ; among these were pathway synthetic lethal effects, in which synthetic lethal partners act in either parallel pathways or within the same pathway to modulate a process that is essential in tumour cells (Fig. 2). An example is provided by the synthetic lethal interaction between the tumour suppressor protein adenomatous polyposis coli protein (APC) and [beta]-catenin, both of which modulate oncogenic WNT signalling. The screens also identified paralogue effects, in which synthetic lethal partners are paralogues that retain at least one overlapping function that is essential to tumour cells (Fig. 3), such as CDK4 and CDK6 or the SWI/SNF proteins ARID1A and ARID1B, and collateral lethality effects (Figs 4,5). Similarly, other classifications of synthetic lethal effects have been proposed that include the overlapping concepts of protective essential7 and induced essential effects8 , both of which describe the scenario in which an alteration in one gene is deleterious unless mitigated by the activity of a second gene; inactivation of this second gene, therefore, leads to synthetic lethality. Protective essential and induced essential effects might be highly relevant in cancer, where driver alterations (such as oncogene activation or tumour suppressor gene loss) impart an eventual fitness advantage upon cells but might also have deleterious effects that, if not kept in check, could result in cell death. For example, replication fork stress caused by oncogenes might have a tumour-promoting effect (such as promoting the formation of mutations in DNA) but might also impart a heightened requirement for proteins, such as ATR, that prevent the deleterious effects of excessive replication fork stress, an effect that could be exploited clinically using ATR inhibitors. Defining the different modes by which synthetic lethal effects operate could, in principle, enable other novel synthetic lethal interactions to be predicted rather than identified empirically. 
Other approaches, both computational and experimental, are also augmenting the search for new synthetic lethal interactions. For example, the development of genome-wide protein-protein interaction maps in model organisms has led to the observation that essential proteins tend to have a higher number of interactions than those that are less essential7 ; in principle, applying a similar analysis to understand the interactome of synthetic lethal target proteins could enable the prediction of new synthetic lethal effects. Furthermore, an analysis of tumour-profiling data sets suggests that loss of individual protein complex components in tumours (for example, via gene deletion) often results in the partial or complete loss of other parts of the protein complex from the tumour125 . In some cases, further inhibition of these collaterally lost complex subunits results in synthetic lethality125 (Fig. 5), suggesting that an in silico analysis of tumour proteomes could be used to predict synthetic lethal effects. 
At the experimental level, advances in gene perturbation technologies will likely enhance the ability to empirically identify and validate synthetic lethal interactions. While much of the focus over the past decade has been on exploiting RNAi, transposon mutagenesis and chemical mutagenesis of genomes to identify synthetic lethal effects, including gene editing using CRISPR-Cas9-based approaches, have gained widespread application in this regard. Modifications of the CRISPR system have also become available that enable specific genes to be transcriptionally silenced (CRISPRi) or activated (CRISPRa)126 . These methods can also be used in combination to define genetic interactions on a large scale. In addition, CRISPRi has been combined with single-cell sequencing, resulting in a technique called Perturb-seq 127 , which is designed to uncover new components of pathways as well as the targets of drugs. CRISPR systems adapted to mutate and/or alter the expression of more than one gene are ideally suited to the definition of genetic interaction networks and might enable the discovery of higher-order interactions. 
Future directions 
The success of the discovery and development of PARP inhibitors as synthetic lethal therapies for patients with BRCA1 -mutated or BRCA2 -mutated cancers has driven research into the genetic interactions between cancer genes and potential therapeutic targets. In addition to hypothesis-driven approaches, large-scale experimental and computational methodologies are being used to discover cancer-specific synthetic lethal interactions at an unprecedented rate. However, PARP inhibitors in patients with BRCA -mutant cancers remain the only FDA-approved therapy that involves synthetic lethality, and many of the products of commonly altered genes in cancer, such as TP53 and RB1 , remain untargeted with currently approved agents. Considerations of what will be required to discover and develop such therapies are, therefore, important. 
In considering whether a given synthetic lethal interaction might eventually deliver clinical benefit, the magnitude of the synthetic lethal effect is a critical consideration. In terms of the size of the synthetic lethal effect, the interaction between PARP inhibitors and loss-of-function BRCA mutations is substantial, having up to a 100-fold difference in sensitivity compared with wild-type cells depending on the system. Some of the synthetic lethal interactions described thus far might be statistically significant and even biologically meaningful but are also too small to translate into efficacy in the clinic. Discovery and validation strategies should emphasize the need to identify synthetic lethal effects of a considerable magnitude. The use of better screening technologies, linked with improvements in computational analysis, could yield novel synthetic lethal interactions that are more amenable to therapeutic targeting. 
Some synthetic lethal interactions, as exemplified by many of those involving mutant RAS, are private, meaning that they are dependent upon the specific histology, cell type, and/or genetic background and are not consistent across different models. These 'soft' synthetic lethal effects need a distinct development strategy compared with 'hard' effects, such as the interaction between PARP inhibitors and mutant BRCA1/2, which is more resistant to this heterogeneity. The choice of systems for discovery and development is also important. For many tumour suppressor genes, insufficient numbers of cell lines harbouring the specific genetic lesions of interest are available, especially when potential heterogeneity of the effects is also taken into account. This lack of cell lines limits the evaluation of histology-dependent effects. 
One clear challenge to the field is how methods might be developed that enable robust synthetic lethal effects (those that are relatively resilient to other molecular changes or plasticity) to be predicted from first principles; at present, the robustness of synthetic lethal effect is critical to the development of effective treatments but remains largely determined by empirical means (such as assessments involving multiple model systems), which are often time consuming and expensive. The ability to discriminate robust synthetic lethal effects from those that are less robust might emerge from a greater understanding of the characteristics of known, robust synthetic lethal interactions. Some of these characteristics might emerge from the further analysis of existing synthetic lethal screens (such as large-scale shRNA or CRISPR-Cas9 screens involving cancer cell lines) or even by assessing whether or not some of the predictable characteristics of essential genes in model organisms7 also apply to cancer cells. Moreover, screens with subsequent validation in more biologically appropriate systems, such as 3D organoid cultures or in vivo in mice, might yield more robust synthetic lethal effects. 
The simultaneous exploitation of multiple distinct synthetic lethal effects in order to uncover novel combination therapies remains an underexploited aspect of the principle of synthetic lethality. Most solid tumours are driven by a number of truncal driver mutations, offering the possibility of rationally designing combination therapies that target multiple distinct driver effects at the same time. For example, the co-occurrence of loss-of-function mutations in APC with oncogenic KRAS mutations in some tumours might predict a response to WNT pathway inhibitors that are synthetic lethal with the APC defect, as well as to MAPK inhibitors that target KRAS addiction. Likewise, in mouse models of triple-negative breast cancer that possess both Brca1 loss-of-function mutations and Fgfr2 oncogenic fusions, the combination of a PARP inhibitor exploiting the BRCA1 defect and an FGFR inhibitor targeting the Fgfr2 fusion is more effective than either agent alone128 . Such combination synthetic lethal approaches are not conceptually complex but might deliver comparable, if not superior results to those typically achieved using combination therapies designed to act synergistically on a single driver mutation, as long as the two drugs used have distinct mechanisms of action and are, therefore, less likely to be affected by a single mechanism of drug resistance. A certain level of understanding is already emerging that many of the combination approaches that have empirically been found to be effective in treating patients with cancer work by combining distinct mechanisms of action129 ; perhaps the task ahead is to rationally design new approaches that exploit this effect by first identifying synthetic lethal interactions with individual driver gene defects. 
A separate extension of the synthetic lethality principle might be to identify higher-order synthetic lethal effects. Rather than single cancer driver genes being synthetic lethal with inhibition of a specific target (such as inhibition of A is synthetic lethal with a defect in B), inhibition of a combination of targets is required to elicit a synthetic lethal effect (inhibition of A plus inhibition of B is synthetic lethal with a defect in C). No a priori reason exists explaining why such higher-order synthetic lethal interactions might not be common. Indeed, many of the existing drug combination strategies in cancer might already exploit this concept, not necessarily by design; such higher-order effects may work in part by simultaneously targeting a driver gene effect through synthetic lethality as well as by inhibiting any synthetic rescue effects that would otherwise reverse the primary synthetic lethality. The proposed combination of inhibitors of EGFR with BRAF inhibitors in BRAF -mutant colon cancer is an example of such an approach130 . 
Conclusions 
In conclusion, the approval of PARP inhibitors has driven considerable excitement surrounding the prospects of further clinically effective approaches based on synthetic lethality being developed. Several already discovered additional synthetic lethal interactions are showing promise, and with the advent of powerful new technologies, many more are likely to be revealed. 

