Abstract: 
Endocrine therapies targeting oestrogen action (anti-oestrogens, such as tamoxifen, and aromatase inhibitors) decrease mortality from breast cancer, but their efficacy is limited by intrinsic and acquired therapeutic resistance. Candidate molecular biomarkers and gene expression signatures of tamoxifen response emphasize the importance of deregulation of proliferation and survival signalling in endocrine resistance. However, definition of the specific genetic lesions and molecular processes that determine clinical endocrine resistance is incomplete. The development of large-scale computational and genetic approaches offers the promise of identifying the mediators of endocrine resistance that may be exploited as potential therapeutic targets and biomarkers of response in the clinic. 
The steroid hormone oestrogen is central to normal female physiology, reproduction and behaviour, through its effects on cellular processes including cell proliferation and cell survival. These effects are mediated by nuclear oestrogen receptors (ER[alpha] and ER[beta]; BOX 1). ER[alpha] is responsible for many of the effects of oestrogen on normal and cancerous breast tissue, through ligand-activated transcriptional regulation (genomic actions) and by acting as a component of membrane and cytoplasmic signalling cascades (non-genomic actions) (1) (FIG. 1). 
Sustained exposure to endogenous or exogenous oestrogen is a well-established cause of breast cancer (2,3), underpinning the use of anti-oestrogens and aromatase inhibitors in breast cancer prevention (4-6). At least 70% of breast cancers are classified as ER-positive breast cancers (7), and interfering with oestrogen action has been a mainstay of breast cancer treatment for more than a century. Early therapies included surgical removal of the ovaries, but the synthesis of competitive inhibitors of oestrogen-ER binding during the 1970s led to the first, and to date most successful, targeted cancer therapy: the selective oestrogen receptor modulator (SERM) tamoxifen (8). Adjuvant therapy with tamoxifen almost halves the rate of disease recurrence and reduces the annual breast cancer death rate by one-third, making a significant contribution to the 25-30% decrease in breast cancer mortality in the past two decades (9). Subsequently, other new, effective endocrine therapies have been developed that target oestrogen synthesis (such as aromatase inhibitors (10)) or ER signalling (such as other SERMs and 'pure' anti-oestrogens (11)). 
One-third of women treated with tamoxifen for 5 years will have recurrent disease within 15 years (9), and so endocrine-resistant disease may represent up to one-quarter of all breast cancers. Therefore, two major challenges for the successful treatment of breast cancer are the development of more specific biomarkers that predict therapeutic response to endocrine therapy and the identification of new therapeutic targets for endocrine-resistant disease. This Review summarizes and evaluates the recent insights into the mechanisms of endocrine resistance that have been made through candidate gene approaches, as well as more global gene expression profiling and functional genetic screens. We necessarily focus on tamoxifen resistance, as the experience with this drug is more extensive and the clinical data more mature than for other drugs. Many of the broad concepts discussed will probably also apply to resistance to aromatase inhibitors and other anti-oestrogens, although the lack of clinical cross-resistance (10-12) indicates that some resistance mechanisms are independent. 
Molecular mechanisms of resistance 
The primary mechanism of de novo or intrinsic resistance to tamoxifen is lack of expression of ER[alpha]. Recently, a second intrinsic mechanism has been documented in which patients carrying inactive alleles of cytochrome P450 2D6 (CYP2D6) (approximately 8% of Caucasian women) fail to convert tamoxifen to its active metabolite, endoxifen, and are consequently less responsive to tamoxifen (13). By contrast, a plethora of mechanisms have been postulated to account for acquired resistance following prolonged exposure to tamoxifen, some of which may also account for intrinsic resistance in the clinic. Much of the published information on these potential molecular mechanisms has been derived from ER[alpha]-positive breast cancer cell lines and from variants of these cell lines selected for adaptation to sustained exposure to anti-oestrogens or withdrawal of oestrogen. Such models identify mechanisms that can induce tamoxifen resistance in vitro rather than those that actually mediate resistance in patients with breast cancer, and they have several other potential limitations. These include the degree to which the few ER[alpha]-positive breast cancer cell lines studied reflect the range of ER-positive phenotypes in situ and the absence of epithelial-stromal and tumour-host interactions that probably modulate sensitivity in vivo. Furthermore, the mechanisms that are responsible for the clinical observation that tamoxifen-resistant cancers often respond to second-line endocrine therapies (10-12) remain unclear. 
Notwithstanding these potential limitations, studies of candidate genes involved in oestrogen signalling (FIG. 1) or anti-oestrogen regulation of cell proliferation and survival (FIG. 2) and more global unbiased approaches using cell line models have yielded important concepts and hypotheses that correlate with tamoxifen resistance in the clinic, and they have provided a basis for new therapeutic approaches. Deregulation of various aspects of oestrogen signalling is a common mechanism for resistance, but unrelated mechanisms that provide tumour cells with alternative proliferative and survival stimuli also confer resistance. 
As detailed information on the biology of the many molecules implicated in tamoxifen resistance in vitro and the means by which they cause resistance is summarized in a series of excellent recent reviews (11,12,14-21), we focus here on recent developments that shed light on potential mechanisms of prognostic or predictive importance. As shown by the examples in TABLE 1, most of the molecules that modulate tamoxifen sensitivity in experimental models are correlated with disease outcome not only in women treated with tamoxifen but also in a wider population of patients with breast cancer. Furthermore, because adjuvant tamoxifen has been the 'therapy of choice' in ER-positive breast cancer for more than 25 years, most available patient cohorts do not allow the comparison of therapeutic responsiveness and outcome in well-matched control populations that differ only with respect to tamoxifen therapy. Therefore, it is difficult to distinguish specific differences in tumour reponse to tamoxifen from the broader effects of the underlying biology of the disease. 
ER and co-regulators. Response to tamoxifen is rare in ER-negative breast cancer, and so ER[alpha] expression is currently the principal biomarker of response to endocrine therapy. Early studies implicated the loss of ER[alpha] expression or ER[alpha] mutations as potential mechanisms of acquired resistance. However, loss of ER[alpha] expression occurs in only a minority (15-20%) of resistant breast cancers (22) and <1% of ER-positive tumours have ER[alpha] mutations (14,20,23). More recently, expression of a new truncated variant of ER[alpha], ER[alpha]36, in the presence of full-length ER[alpha] has been associated with reduced responsiveness (24). The development of antibodies that can distinguish between ER[alpha], ER[beta] and naturally occurring ER[beta] variants (BOX 1) has led to the identification of responses in ER[beta]-positive but ER[alpha]-negative cancers and a potential role for the carboxy-terminally truncated variants of ER[beta] (ER[beta]2/cx and ER[beta]5) in tamoxifen responsiveness (25,26). In addition, the oestrogen-related receptor ERR[gamma] is overexpressed and mediates tamoxifen resistance in lobular invasive breast cancer models (27). 
One mechanism by which ER[alpha] regulates gene expression is through protein-protein interactions with other transcription factors--for example, activator protein 1 (AP1), specificity protein 1 (SP1) and nuclear factor-[kappa]13 (NF-[kappa]B) (FIG. 1).Increased API and NF-[kappa]B transcriptional activity are also associated with endocrine resistance (28-30). ER[alpha] function is regulated by post-translational modifications (phosphorylation, methylation and sumoylation) that influence interactions with other proteins, including transcriptional co-regulators (19) and cytoplasmic signalling molecules (FIG. 1). There is significant evidence to show that effects on these end points contribute to endocrine resistance (18,20,31). Overexpression and increased phosphorylation of ER[alpha] co-activators, particularly nuclear receptor co-activator 3 (NCOA3; also known as AIB1 or SRC3), leads to constitutive ER[alpha]-mediated transcription, which confers resistance in vitro and in xenograft models (12,16) and is associated with reduced responsiveness to tamoxifen in patients (22). Transient methylation of ER[alpha] at R260 by protein arginine N-methyltransferase I (PRMT1) results in the formation of cytoplasmic complexes that contain ER[alpha], PI3K, the tyrosine kinase SRC and focal adhesion kinase (FAK; also known as PTK2) and that activate Akt (FIG. 1). However, it is not known whether this methylation event, which is frequent in breast cancer (33), is associated with the endocrine response. Another example is the ER co-activator PELP 1, which in many breast cancers localizes to the cytoplasm, where it can confer tamoxifen resistance (31). PELP1 functions as a scaffold that modulates ER interaction with SRC, leading to activation of SRC and the Erk family kinases and also promotes oestrogen activation of PI3K (31) (FIG. 1). 
Receptor tyrosine kinase signalling. The bidirectional crosstalk between ER and receptor tyrosine kinase signalling is evidenced by the early observations of reciprocal expression of ER and members of the epidermal growth factor receptor (Egfr) family such as EGFR and ERBB2 (also known as HER2) (34). Growth factors of the Egf and insulin-like growth factor (Igf) families can modulate tamoxifen sensitivity in vitro (35); although breast cancer cells are quiescent and insensitive to growth factor stimulation following treatment with the pure anti-oestrogen ICI 182780 (fulvestrant), tamoxifen treatment does not lead to growth factor insensitivity (36). This has focused attention on receptor tyrosine kinase expression and function as potential mediators of endocrine resistance. Increased expression of EGFR, ERBB2 and IGF1 receptor (IGFIR) can elicit tamoxifen resistance (37-40), as can activation of the components of their downstream signalling pathways, particularly the Erk and PI3K pathways (41-43). In some cases, deregulation of these signalling pathways occurs as a result of genetic or epigenetic modifications, such as amplification of ERBB2, activating mutations in PIK3CA, which encodes a catalytic subunit of type I PI3Ks, and loss of heterozygosity or methylation of PTEN, a tumour suppressor that inhibits the PI3K pathway (20,21). In other cases, however, deregulation of these pathways reflects aberrations in upstream regulators, such as the activation of Akt in association with the loss of PTEN expression or overexpression of ERBB2 (REFS 20,21) and activation of IGF1R and ERBB3 following the loss of PTEN (40). How these events mediate tamoxifen resistance has not been fully elucidated, but several potential contributing factors have been suggested (FIGS 1,3): decreased ER [alpha] expression mediated by ERK activation; loss of ER-mediated repression of EGFR and ERBB2 and consequent activation of mitogenic signalling cascades; ligand-independent activation of ER or its co-activators through phosphorylation; upregulation of key cell cycle regulators, for example MYC and the D-type and E-type cyclins, through constitutive activation of mitogenic signalling pathways; and the inhibition of apoptosis through constitutive activation of survival signalling. 
Box 1 | Oestrogen receptors

The oestrogen receptors ER[alpha] and ER[beta] are encoded by
separate genes located on different chromosomes. They have a
similar overall domain structure, consisting of a central
DNA-binding domain flanked by two autonomous transcriptional
activation domains, one of which, AF-2, is positioned in the
ligand-binding domain and is ligand dependent (reviewed in REF.
11). The AF-2 domain also mediates interactions with co-activators
that increase ER transcriptional activity (19, 127). Isoforms of
both ER[alpha] and ER[beta] have been described, but the most
relevant in the context of endocrine resistance are a truncated
variant of ER[alpha], ER[alpha]36 (REF. 24), and two isoforms of
ER[beta], ER[beta]2/cx and ER[beta]35, in which amino-terminal
truncations remove some of the ligand-binding domain (26).

In the breast, ER[alpha]-positive epithelial cells located in the
ductal lumen facilitate the development of a branched ductal tree,
which functions as a scaffold for milk-producing alveoli. Not all
luminal cells express ER[alpha], but ER[alpha]-null mice develop
only a rudimentary mammary ductal tree and are unable to lactate
(128), indicating that the ER[alpha]-positive cells make an
essential contribution to mammary development. By contrast, the
mammary glands of ER[beta]-null mice develop normally (128). When
the two receptors are co-expressed in breast cancer cell lines,
ER[beta] functions as an antagonist of ER[alpha], impairing the
ability of oestrogen to stimulate proliferation (129).
Overexpression of ERBB2 is one of the best-characterized mechanisms of endocrine resistance (21). Recent evidence implicates the loss of transcriptional repressors and amplification of ERBB2 as mechanisms that are responsible for increased expression of this receptor. The X-linked tumour suppressor forkhead box P3 (FOXP3) and the zinc finger transcription factor GATA4 can repress ERBB2 expression, even in a cell line with an approximately tenfold amplification of ERBB2, and their expression is negatively correlated with ERBB2 expression in breast cancer (44,45). In addition, a recent pivotal study showed that ER[alpha]-mediated repression of ERBB2 is dependent on competition between the paired-domain transcription factor PAX2 and the ER[alpha] co-activator NCOA3 for binding and regulation of ERBB2 transcription and, in turn, tamoxifen responsiveness (46). A direct relationship between FOXP3 or GATA4 expression and tamoxifen responsiveness has not been established. However, increased PAX2 expression and consequent repression of ERBB2 was associated with increased survival following tamoxifen treatment, and loss of PAX2 expression in the presence of increased NCOA3 expression predicted a poor outcome (46), indicating that this mechanism is of direct clinical relevance. 
Members of the Src family of tyrosine kinases, particularly SRC itself, and their downstream targets are also commonly overexpressed in breast cancer and have been implicated in resistance. The Src substrate BCAR1 (also known as CAS) is a focal adhesion adaptor protein that activates proliferative, survival and invasion pathways. It can induce tamoxifen resistance when overexpressed in vitro (47), and BCAR1-overexpressing breast cancers are less responsive to tamoxifen (48). BCAR1 binds and activates SRC with consequent phosphorylation of the Src substrates EGFR and signal transducer and activator of transcription 5B (STAT5B) and effects on downstream signalling pathways (20). However, recent data suggest that the ability of BCAR1 to confer anti-oestrogen resistance may not require interaction with SRC (49). The putative guanine nucleotide-exchange factor BCAR3, which synergizes with BCAR1 to activate SRO (50), also causes tamoxifen resistance in vitro (51). In addition, BCAR3 activates Rac and p21-activated kinase 1 (PAK1) (52); the latter is itself implicated in tamoxifen resistance through ER[alpha] phosphorylation (53). 
Cell cycle regulators. Data from experimental model systems, supported by clinical correlations, indicate that anti-oestrogens are both cytostatic and cytotoxic. Neoadjuvant endocrine therapy leads to decreased proliferation (54), and in cell culture anti-oestrogen treatment leads to a G1 phase-specific cell cycle arrest and a consequent reduction in growth rate (55). Not unexpectedly, the molecules pivotal to the anti-oestrogen effects on cell cycle progression (FIG. 2a) have central roles in the control of G1 phase progression downstream of polypeptide growth factor mitogens, as well as oestrogen. Aberrant expression of several such oestrogen and anti-oestrogen targets confers resistance in vitro and is associated with reduced tamoxifen responsiveness in patients. Overexpression of MYC, cyclin E1, cyclin D1 or the cyclin D1 splice variant cyclin D1b, or the inactivation of the RB tumour suppressor--an important substrate for cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) that are active in G1 phase--and the decreased expression of the CDK inhibitors p21 or p27, results in decreased anti-oestrogen sensitivity in vitro (56-64) MYC overexpression and consequent tamoxifen resistance is accompanied by transcriptional repression of CDKN1A (which encodes p21) (65), relieving the inhibitory effect of p21 on cyclin E1-CDK2 complexes. Cyclin D1 overexpression leads to an increased abundance of cyclin D 1-CDK4 complexes (which indirectly activate cyclin E1-CDK2 (REF. 58) by sequestering p21 and p27) and to the activation of cyclin E2-CDK2 by increased transcription of CCNE2 (which encodes cyclin E2) (66). In addition to its cell cycle regulatory role, cyclin D1 interacts with several transcription factors, including ER[alpha] and STAT3 (REF. 67). Tamoxifen induces cyclin D1 binding to ER[alpha] at the expense of cyclin D1-STAT3 binding, activating both STAT3 and ER[alpha]--this is an additional mechanism by which cyclin D1 overexpression can affect the tumour's response to Tamoxifen (68). Therefore, MYC and cyclin D 1 overexpression can potentially affect anti-oestrogen sensitivity at several levels. 
[FIGURE 1 OMITTED] 
Supporting the clinical relevance of the aberrant expression of these molecules, there is accumulating evidence that overexpression of MYC or cyclin D1 is associated with tamoxifen resistance in patients (69,70). There is also more limited evidence for a relationship between the overexpression of cyclin E1, RB inactivation and reduced expression of p27 and clinical response (62,69-71). In breast cancer, overexpression of MYC, cyclin D1 and cyclin El is at least two to three times more common than amplification of the corresponding genes", and RB inactivation is also more common than RBI deletion or mutation (62). The reasons for this probably include the activation of upstream mitogenic signalling pathways and the deregulation of transcriptional regulators, including the E2f family. The gene encoding p27, CDKNIB, is rarely mutated or deleted in breast cancer, but p27 expression is frequently reduced by oncogenic activation of mitogenic signalling (for example, by ERBB2 overexpression or Src activation) and increased p27 degradation (71). The microRNAs (miRNAs) miR-221 and miR-222 reduce p27 expression and confer resistance to tamoxifen, although the precise mechanism of resistance is unclear, as these miRNAs also reduce ER[alpha] expression and are overexpressed in ERBB2-overexpressing breast cancers (72,73). There are conflicting data on the relationship between p21 expression and outcome in breast cancer (69), and the role of p21 in tamoxifen response in breast cancer has not been studied extensively, although the ERBB2 repressor FOXP3 is essential for p21 expression (74) and there is some evidence for p21 deregulation in cancers with ERBB2 overexpression or Akt activation (70). Akt activation results in the mislocalization of p21 to the cytoplasm; predominantly cytoplasmic localization of p21 has been associated with poor response to tamoxifen (75). 
[FIGURE 2 OMITTED] 
Cell survival signalling and apoptosis. Treatment with high (micromolar) concentrations of anti-oestrogen, oestrogen withdrawal (mimicking the effects of aromatase inhibitors) or aromatase inhibitor treatment of cells transfected with aromatase leads to the activation of the cellular stress response and apoptosis in breast cancer cells (17,76). The molecular mechanisms are not well defined, but several molecular consequences that promote apoptosis have been documented, including the regulation of Bcl-2 family members and increases in the apoptotic second messenger ceramide (17,76) (FIG. 2b). Crosstalk between the apoptotic effects of anti-oestrogens and the tumour necrosis factor (TNF) pathway, as well as anti-oestrogen effects on survival signalling through the PI3K-Akt, NF-xB and interferon pathways, is also likely to contribute to anti-oestrogen-mediated apoptosis (17) (FIG. 2b). Finally, intriguing recent observations indicate that autophagy is a mechanism of cell survival in breast cancer cells that are resistant to apoptotic concentrations of tamoxifen (77). 
It has been difficult to establish the role of apoptosis in the clinical setting. Neoadjuvant studies have yielded conflicting data and have been limited by small patient numbers and the methodological challenges of measuring apoptosis in vivo (78). Nevertheless, many signatures of response to endocrine therapy include genes with roles in apoptosis, as discussed below. As tumour growth reflects the balance between cell proliferation and cell death, disruption of this balance by effects on survival signalling and apoptosis are expected to affect clinical response. There is accumulating evidence for the increased expression of anti-apoptotic molecules, for example BCL-2 and BCL-[X.sub.L] and decreased expression of pro-apoptotic molecules, for example BAK, BIK and caspase 9, in attenuated responses to tamoxifen (17). Although many of these responses are probably consequences of the activation of survival signalling through the PI3K-Akt pathway, as a consequence of overexpression of receptor tyrosine kinases and increased 'non-genomic' signalling from cytoplasmic ER, other pathways have been documented. For example, increased DNA-binding and transcriptional activity of NF-KB are features of tamoxifen-resistant cells (30), and tamoxifen sensitivity can be restored by parthenolide, a specific NF-[kappa]B inhibitor (30,79). Tamoxifen insensitivity in vitro is also associated with the downregulation of IRF1, an interferon-responsive putative tumour suppressor that binds NF-[kappa]B and is essential for apoptosis. Furthermore, overexpression of a splice variant of human X-box-binding protein 1 (XBP1), a transcription factor that controls the unfolded protein response, is also associated with tamoxifen resistance in vitro and poor survival in patients with breast cancer treated with tamoxifen (80-82). NF-KB, XBP1 and IRF1 expression are correlated in patients with breast cancer (83(, which may indicate that these molecules function in a common pathway (14). 
Signatures of tamoxifen responsiveness 
The advent of genome-wide gene expression analysis allowed clinical material from patients of known responsiveness to tamoxifen to be used as a means of gaining broad insights into the potential mechanisms of endocrine resistance. It also helped in the development of clinically relevant markers of response and potential mechanisms of resistance. This is not without its own limitations, for example the difficulty of obtaining tumour tissue at the time when resistance has developed, rather than before therapy. 
Selection on the basis of disease outcome. The identification of women who are unlikely to respond to endocrine therapy, but who may benefit from chemotherapy, is a pressing clinical need that has driven much of the work aimed at identifying clinically useful markers of tamoxifen response. Gene selection on the basis of correlations between expression and patient outcome, with the goal of identifying a minimum gene set that retains robust predictive ability in women treated with tamoxifen, has led to the development of several gene signatures (TABLE 2), some of which are the subject of testing in prospective clinical trials (reviewed in REF. 84). Other signatures derived using a broader group of patients with breast cancer can also distinguish prognostic groups within ER-positive cancers treated with tamoxifen (TABLE 2). 
Consistent with the idea that deregulation of ER signalling and upregulation of alternative mitogenic pathways is a common mechanism of resistance, essentially all these signatures contain a substantial proportion of genes that are ER targets, are involved in ER action or have roles in cell proliferation and survival (TABLE 2). Genes involved in apoptosis, invasion and cell motility are also consistently included (85) (TABLE 2). Perhaps surprisingly, MYC, CCND1 (which encodes cyclin D1) and RBI are rarely included in the signatures, despite the predominance of proliferation markers and the importance of these molecules in anti-oestrogen effects on proliferation. However, signatures predominantly composed of MYC-responsive or RB-- and Elf-responsive genes are associated with poor outcome in women treated with tamoxifen (62,86), suggesting that the absence of these genes reflects the limitations of assessing their activity on the basis of their expression alone. 
Because of their shared biological features, many of the signatures selected on the basis of correlations with outcome are largely concordant, both with each other and with more generally derived prognostic signatures that have not been tested for association with response to tamoxifen, for example the 'Mammaprint' signature (87-89). In a recent meta-analysis that compared nine prognostic signatures, the subset of genes related to proliferation within each signature was at least as good a predictor as the whole signature (90). However, the remaining genes were also often significantly correlated with outcome (90), indicating that biological processes other than proliferation may also be important. These probably include apoptosis and invasion or metastasis, as signatures predominantly composed of genes with roles in these cellular processes are predictive of poor outcome after tamoxifen treatment (86,91,92). 
Biology as a selection criterion. Biomarkers of therapeutic response are expected to include genes that are mechanistically involved in conferring drug resistance, but signatures of tamoxifen response derived solely from clinical outcome data have provided only limited mechanistic insights. There is little overlap between their component genes and, consequently, there are few obvious starting points for functional studies. Potential contributing factors include dependence of the signature composition on the patient set used to derive it, and minimization of the signature size to increase clinical practicality, with the result that multiple non-overlapping signatures of equal predictive power could potentially be derived from the same analysis (93). Therefore, any single prognostic or predictive signature contains a somewhat arbitrary set of genes, and this selectivity can confound attempts to understand the underlying biology. 
A potentially more mechanistically revealing approach is the inclusion of facets of the underlying biology in the selection criteria for genes that constitute a signature. Because of the importance of oestrogen action in breast cancer biology and the evidence for deregulation of oestrogen signalling as a major mechanism of resistance, oestrogen-regulated genes are common starting points for the derivation of signatures that are predictive of outcome in women treated with tamoxifen (86,94-96) (TABLE 2). The progesterone receptor (PR) is a well-established marker of response to endocrine therapy (97); PR expression occurs rarely in the absence of functional ER, implying that PR-positive cancers, and cancers expressing high levels of other oestrogen-induced genes, are likely to be more dependent on ER signalling. However, although a signature of oestrogen-induced genes selected on the basis of co-expression with PR is correlated with longer survival in tamoxifen-treated women (96), many oestrogen-induced genes are correlated with poor outcome (86,94,95). It is clear that oestrogen-regulated genes are not homogeneous but are instead regulated by different mechanisms (for example, direct ER[alpha]-DNA binding at oestrogen response elements compared with indirect ER[alpha] tethering to DNA through interactions with other transcription factors (FIG. 1)) and can be divided into biologically distinct subsets (86,91) that may have independent relationships with response to therapy. 
Intrinsic biology or altered response? An important clinical question concerns the degree to which the correlation between individual signatures and outcome in women treated with tamoxifen is a consequence of response to therapy rather than inherently aggressive or indolent biology. As with individual candidate genes (TABLE 1), many outcome signatures, even those derived specifically from women treated with tamoxifen, are correlated with outcome irrespective of treatment (TABLE 2) and may therefore reflect the underlying biology as well as, or instead of, response to treatment. Differential sensitivity to endocrine therapy is observed in the different subtypes of ER-positive breast cancer that are defined by common patterns of gene expression (98,99). Of these, the best characterized are the luminal A and B subtypes. The luminal A subtype has higher ER expression and lower proliferation indices than the remaining luminal cancers have, and a better outcome independent of tamoxifen therapy (90,98-100). The subtypes are characterized by different patterns and degrees of copy number abnormalities (101), indicating that at least some differences in clinical response to tamoxifen may arise through differences in intrinsic tumour biology rather than through differences in tamoxifen response per se. 
Differences in response also arise from differences in the rate of cell proliferation. Although proliferation is reduced in almost all ER-positive breast cancers following neoadjuvant endocrine therapy, the level of proliferation following short-term therapy is a better predictor of outcome than its pretreatment level or the magnitude of the decrease in proliferation following treatment (102,103). This suggests that poor treatment response does not result from intrinsically high proliferation but rather from an ability to maintain high levels of proliferation in the presence of tamoxifen. Increased proliferation that occurs as a consequence of deregulated mitogenic signalling pathways may be more readily inhibited by tamoxifen than is increased proliferation that results from genetic or epigenetic events targeting individual genes directly involved in cell cycle progression (for example, MYC or CCNDI amplification). In addition, the effects of the deregulation of cell cycle regulatory genes are likely to be gene specific. Consequently, to better understand the mechanisms of tamoxifen resistance it might be informative to distinguish different mechanisms of deregulation of proliferation or different types of proliferative defects. 
[FIGURE 3 OMITTED] 
Insights from computational approaches 
Dissection of biological processes. A limitation of many clustering algorithms used to derive gene signatures is their dependence on global behaviour across the entire test set of profiles, at the expense of identifying more specific features that may be strongly related to only a small group of patients or conditions. In addition, an individual gene is often allocated to a particular cluster, although genes commonly contribute to different biological processes or are regulated by multiple stimuli. However, some algorithms do allow the identification of partially overlapping gene sets that show coordinate expression in only particular contexts, and so these tend to be functionally coherent. One such algorithm yielded eight biologically consistent gene set 'modules' in breast cancer expression profiles, including one module that was largely composed of genes with roles in apoptosis (91). These genes were downregulated when MCF-7 breast cancer cells were treated with tamoxifen, suggesting that their expression may reflect active ER signaling (91). Consistent with this idea, high expression of this module was associated with longer survival in several patient populations, including in women treated with tamoxifen. 
A complementary approach is to identify biologically coherent signatures on the basis of a candidate gene approach or a functional annotation. For example, the high expression of a gene signature consisting of genes that are differentially expressed following RB loss, or the expression of constitutively active (growth-inhibitory) RB mutants in rodent fibroblasts, was associated with shorter disease-free survival in women treated with tamoxifen (62). In another study, a combination of gene ontology and pathway analysis that used a curated database of functional annotations led to the subdivision of oestrogen-regulated genes into networks that represented specific biological processes, for example two distinct aspects of cell proliferation (cell cycle progression and increased cell size (cell growth)), apoptosis and survival signalling, and transcriptional regulation (86). The networks representing cell proliferation and apoptosis were predictive of poor outcome in women treated with tamoxifen". Previous analyses had pointed to both proliferation and apoptosis genes as potential markers of outcome in women treated with tamoxifen. This study provides evidence that these may identify distinct subpopulations with different mechanisms of resistance, as the cell proliferation-related signatures and the apoptosis signature were independent predictors of outcome in multivariate analysis (86). 
Molecular mechanisms. Although data from large-scale genomic studies of breast cancer are increasingly available, few studies have adopted global approaches to identify specific molecular aberrations that might be associated with response to endocrine therapy. However, a global biological concept analysis identified associations between a signature of early relapse in ER-positive breast cancer and the activation of MYC- and E2f-responsive pathways, together with chromosomal aberrations at loci including 8q24 (the location of the MYC gene) (104). The E2f and MYC biological concepts seemed to make independent contributions to the likelihood of disease progression (104), despite the considerable overlap in the known functions of these genes. This may be because aberrations in these pathways occur independently and characterize biologically distinct phenotypes, as a subset of ER-positive breast cancers is characterized by a high probability of MYC pathway deregulation but a low probability of Elf pathway deregulation (105,106). 
Functional genetic screens 
In parallel with the emergence of increasingly sophisticated bioinformatic and genomic tools, there has been an increase in the feasibility of global functional screens. Gain-of-function screens in breast cancer cells have identified >40 candidate tamoxifen resistance genes (47,51,107-110). These include genes encoding cell surface receptors (EGFR, ERBB2, platelet-derived growth factor receptor-[beta] (PDGFRB) and colony-stimulating factor 1 receptor (CSF1R)) and their ligands (neuregulin, which is a ligand for some Erbb receptors, and FGF17), intracellular signalling molecules (BCAR1, BCAR3, AKT1, AKT2, SRC and GRB7) and transcriptional regulators (BCAR2 (also known as TRERF1) and the ER corepressor NCOR2 (also known as SMRT)), as well as genes of poorly understood function (for example, BCAR4 and TLE3). Many have roles in signalling pathways that are implicated in endocrine resistance, such as the Erk and PI3K-Akt pathways (as summarized above and in TABLE 1), illustrating the potential for identifying functionally relevant pathways using this approach. Genes derived from unbiased functional screens will not necessarily be deregulated in cancer, and even if they do show differential expression there is no guarantee that this will correlate with a therapeutic response. However, some of the genes that confer tamoxifen resistance in functional genetic screens are overexpressed in breast cancer and are independent predictors of response in women treated with tamoxifen at relapse (48,111-113). 
An RNA interference screen to identify kinases for which decreased expression can reduce tamoxifen sensitivity yielded 20 candidates, including multiple components of the Erk signalling pathway, other intracellular signalling molecules and several kinases related to CDC2, the prototypical CDK (114). One of these, CDK10, was examined in more detail. The CDK10 gene was silenced by methylation in 7 of the 34 breast cancers examined, and low CDK10 expression was associated with poor outcome in women treated with adjuvant tamoxifen (114). Downregulation of CDK10 in cultured breast cancer cells led to an ETS2-dependent increase in RAF1 transcription and activation of the Erk pathway. Therefore, downregulation of CDK10 seems to modulate tamoxifen sensitivity through effects on intracellular signalling, rather than through more direct effects on cell cycle progression. This screen also identified sensitizers of tamoxifen response, many of which were in the PI3K pathway, including PIK3C2B, PDK1 (which is activated by PI3K) and the PDK1 substrates PRKCZ and AKT1, as well as several other activators of Akt (115). The sensitizers identified in a parallel small-molecule screen also included many inhibitors of Akt (115), again emphasizing the importance of the PI3K pathway as a determinant of the response to tamoxifen. 
Implications for therapy 
Endocrine-resistant ER-positive disease accounts for approximately one in four breast cancers but, similarly to the 'triple -negative' phenotype that does not express ER, PR or ERBB2, it is not well served by current targeted therapies. The possibility of identifying new targets for therapy in resistant disease, or patients who may benefit from additional treatment with existing therapies, provides a strong impetus to identify markers and mediators of therapeutic resistance. Some candidate endocrine resistance genes can also affect response to other therapies; for example, BCAR1 confers resistance to Adriamycin (116), and cyclin D1 confers resistance to the EGFR-targeted therapy gefitinib (117). This adds to the challenge of identifying alternative therapies in endocrine-resistant disease. Recent data suggest that integrative bioinformatics and/or targeted large-scale screening may assist in meeting this challenge. One bioinformatic study identified highly significant links between genes repressed by inhibition of PI3K and genes activated by MYC, suggesting that PI3K inhibition may be an effective therapy for MYC-dependent cancers (104). Together with evidence from the combined small-molecule and RNA interference screen discussed above that highlighted inhibition of Akt as a means of potentiating tamoxifen responses in vitro (115), this observation argues that therapies targeting the PI3K-Akt pathway may be useful in endocrine-resistant breast cancer. Similar integrative analyses including data relating specifically to endocrine resistance may yield new targets for further analysis and testing. Synthetic lethal genetic and/or small-molecule screens using cell lines that are tamoxifen resistant, either because of adaption in culture or because of the introduction of specific genetic lesions, may also identify pathways specifically required in tamoxifen-resistant cells and the means of targeting them. 
Current models of endocrine resistance (FIG. 3) identify many individual molecules that can affect antioestrogen sensitivity in vitro and are therefore potential targets for therapy in endocrine-resistant disease. The convergence of many potential resistance genes on the Erk and PI3K pathways suggests that inhibitors of these pathways that are currently in development may be useful in this setting. Data from cell line models indicate that inhibiting Src (118), BCAR1 (REF. 119), Mek-Erk (120), Akt (38,115,121,122), mTOR (39,123) or NF-[kappa]B (30,79) can restore or potentiate tamoxifen sensitivity. However, early clinical trials of EGFR-- and ERBB2-targeted agents that reduce Erk signalling (gefitinib, erlotinib, trastuzamab and lapatinib) or mTOR inhibitors (everolimus and temsirolimus) in combination with endocrine therapies have yielded mixed results, which may be partly due to difficulties in identifying tumours that are dependent on these pathways and so are most likely to benefit from the additional therapy (124). In addition, crosstalk and negative feedback loops between different signal transduction pathways may lead to cellular resistance to individual inhibitors. One approach to this problem is the use of inhibitors that target more than one kinase or the use of combinations of therapies to simultaneously target multiple pathways. Alternatively, end points shared by multiple pathways--for example MYC and cyclin D1-CDK4--could be targeted, which would have the benefit of more directly targeting proliferation, a central component in essentially all gene signatures that are predictive of endocrine resistance. Recent evidence indicates that targeting MYC may be an effective cancer therapy (125), and some small-molecule CDK inhibitors have entered clinical trials (126). 
Concluding remarks 
To date, much of the information on the mechanisms of endocrine resistance has come from studies that have considered relatively few genes. The application of integrative approaches that examine gene expression in the context of global genomic, proteomic or functional data to understand mechanisms of endocrine resistance is in its infancy and has relied on small-scale genomic and transcriptional data sets. Nevertheless, as summarized above, this approach has provided some pointers towards areas for further study. The next generation of high-throughput technologies allows genome-scale genetic and synthetic lethal screens, large-scale proteomic and phospho-proteomic profiling, and parallel transcriptome, epigenome and genome sequencing of both experimental models and well-annotated clinical samples. The further use of integrative bioinformatic approaches combined with these new technologies offers the potential for a 'systems biology' approach, in which cellular responses and pathways are considered as a whole. This may identify previously unconsidered mechanisms for the modulation of therapeutic response, as suggested by recent data implicating miRNAs in tamoxifen resistance (72), and thereby greatly increase the depth of our understanding of the mechanisms of endocrine-resistant disease. This, in turn, should aid in the identification of the specific genetic events that cause resistance and the means by which these events can be targeted therapeutically. 
Aromatase inhibitors 
Drugs that function by blocking aromatase, the enzyme that converts androgens to oestrogens in tissues including the breast and adipose tissue. Examples include anastrazole, letrozole and exemestane. 
ER-positive breast cancers 
In current clinical practice, ER-positive breast cancers are those with immunohistochemically detectable ER[alpha] levels. 
Adjuvant therapy 
A drug treatment (for example, chemotherapy or endocrine therapy) that is given after the primary therapy (for example, surgery and/or radiotherapy), with the aim of increasing the overall effectiveness of treatment. 
SERMs 
Drugs such as tamoxifen that bind the oestrogen receptor and thereby block the effects of oestrogen on tissues such as the breast but that function similarly to oestrogen in other tissues such as bone. Unlike oestrogen, these drugs are not steroidalin structure. 
'Pure' anti-oestrogens 
Drugs that bind the oestrogen receptor, thereby blocking the effect of oestrogen, but have no detectable oestrogen-like effects. Most have a steroidal structure. 
Intrinsic resistance 
The failure to respond to initial drug therapy. 
Cytochrome P450 2D6 (CYP2D6) 
A member of the large and diverse superfamily of cytochrome P450 enzymes. CYP2D6 catalyses the conversion of tamoxifen into its active metabolites, endoxifen and 4-hydroxytamoxifen. It is highly polymorphic, so its activity is variable between individuals. 
Acquired resistance 
In contrast to intrinsic resistance, an initial response to drug therapy followed by subsequent disease progression. 
Neoadjuvant 
A drug treatment that is given weeks to months before surgery, often to reduce the size of tumours before surgery. 
Cyclin E1 
Cyclin El and cyclin E2 are regulatory subunits of kinase complexes that contain CDK2 as their catalytic subunit and regulate the G 1 to S phase cell cycle transition. 
Cyclin D1 
The regulatory subunit of a kinase complex that functions as a growth factor sensor to regulate G 1 phase cell cycle progression. The catalytic subunits of cyclin Dl-dependent kinases are CDK4 and CDK6. 
Bd-2 family 
A protein family of up to 25 members that are classified according to their structure and function as anti-apoptotic (BCL2-like) or pro-apoptotic (multidomain BAX-like and 'BH3-only') proteins. 
Autophagy 
A cellular response in which the cell metabolizes its own contents and organelles to maintain energy production, often in response to stressful stimuli. Although such a process can eventually result in cell death, it can also be used to maintain cell survival. 
Unfolded protein response 
A cellular response to stress that senses the misfolding of proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum. It activates a series of pathways that help the cells survive proteotoxicity that is caused by unfolded proteins or activate mechanisms of cell death. 
Concordant 
Clinical biomarkers and signatures are concordant if they classify the same patients as 'high risk'. 
 
Multivariate analysis 
A statistical analysis of the relationship between multiple parameters (variables) to identify those that have a dominant effect on outcome (termed independent predictors of outcome) and those that are dependant or redundant. 
Biological concepts analysis 
A bioinformatic approach in which related information is grouped together into a biological concept', and associations between different concepts' are sought. 
Synthetic lethal 
In genetics, a phenomenon in which the combination of two otherwise non-lethal mutations results in an inviable cell. Used in the context of functional screens to indicate a screen in which the end point is apparent in only some conditions, for example in the presence of a specific genetic lesion. 
At a glance 
* Endocrine therapies that target oestrogen action (anti-oestrogens and aromatase inhibitors) are widely used and successful breast cancer therapies, but many women treated with these therapies will relapse with endocrine-resistant disease. 
* Mechanisms of endocrine resistance in oestrogen receptor (ER)-positive breast cancers include loss of ER[alpha] expression and expression of truncated isoforms of ER[alpha] and ER[beta], post-translational modifications of ER[alpha], increased AP1 activity and deregulation of ER co-activators, increased receptor tyrosine kinase signalling leading to the activation of the Erk and PI3K pathways, and deregulation of the cell cycle and apoptotic machinery. 
* Gene expression signatures that are predictive of poor outcome in women treated with tamoxifen commonly contain ER target genes, as well as genes involved in proliferation, apoptosis, and invasion and metastasis. Many of these signatures are also predictive of outcome in women who have not been treated with tamoxifen and so are markers of intrinsic biology rather than specific to tamoxifen responsiveness. 
* Gene expression signatures representing particular biological processes (for example, cell cycle progression, cell death and invasion) or pathways (for example, RB deregulation, MYC overexpression and Elf activation) can also predict outcome in women treated with tamoxifen and point towards possible mechanisms for endocrine resistance. 
* Functional genetic screens have successfully identified several genes, the loss or overexpression of which can reduce anti-oestrogen sensitivity in cell lines and is associated with clinical endocrine resistance. 
* Insights into the mechanisms of resistance have suggested possible therapeutic approaches for endocrine-resistant ER-positive breast cancer, for example tyrosine kinase inhibitors. Further potential therapeutic targets may emerge from combining large-scale genomic and transcriptomic data with large-scale functional analyses. Adjuvant therapy 


