We developed a computational method to characterize aneuploidy in tumor samples based on coordinated aberrations in expression of genes localized to each chromosomal region. We summarized the total level of chromosomal aberration in a given tumor in a univariate measure termed total functional aneuploidy. We identified a signature of chromosomal instability from specific genes whose expression was consistently correlated with total functional aneuploidy in several cancer types. Net overexpression of this signature was predictive of poor clinical outcome in 12 cancer data sets [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12] representing six cancer types. Also, the signature of chromosomal instability was higher in metastasis samples than in primary tumors and was able to stratify grade 1 and grade 2 breast tumors according to clinical outcome. These results provide a means to assess the potential role of chromosomal instability in determining malignant potential over a broad range of tumors. 
One of the most consistent characteristics of human solid tumors is chromosomal instability (CIN) [13]. Despite its fundamental importance in cancer biology, the molecular mechanisms underlying CIN are poorly understood [14, 15], and it is rarely measured in the clinic owing to the technical difficulty of ascertainment and a lack of clear therapeutic application [16]. 
Because aneuploidy is a consequence of CIN, genes with expression levels consistently associated with aneuploidy might provide insight into molecular mechanisms underlying CIN. Currently, few clinical tumor samples exist for which the extent of aneuploidy has been directly observed and for which high-resolution gene expression data are available. However, significant correspondence has been observed between chromosome copy number alterations and gene expression changes in the affected regions [17, 18]. Therefore, we used gene expression data to infer chromosomal imbalance at sub-band resolution (Fig. 1). This 'functional aneuploidy' profile describes the net deviation in expression of genes contained in each chromosomal region relative to the remainder of the sampled transcriptome (see Methods). 
As a measure of overall chromosomal imbalance, we defined the 'total functional aneuploidy' (tFA) of a sample as the sum of the magnitudes of its functional aneuploidy features. We assessed tFA across the NCI60 cell line panel, for which gene expression profiles, DNA copy number profiles (SNP-chip) [19] and spectral karyotyping (SKY) data [20] are available, providing independent DNA-based characterization of chromosomal aberrations. The tFA measure correlated with the total number of structural chromosomal aberrations as assessed by SKY (P = 0.0009) and with total aneuploidy measures derived from DNA copy number measurements (P = 0.0004; Supplementary Fig. 1 online). Thus, tFA is a proxy for the overall level of aneuploidy assessed at the transcriptional level (Fig. 1b,c). 
We analyzed 18 gene expression data sets [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12] (Supplementary Fig. 2 online) of various cancer types and found that high tFA was a significant (see P values in Supplementary Fig. 2) predictor of poor clinical outcome in four data sets profiling breast, lung and brain tumors [2, 4, 6, 7] (Supplementary Fig. 2). Given this association with poor prognosis, we reasoned that genes associated with tFA might uncover specific molecular mechanisms connecting high levels of CIN with increased tumor malignancy. Within each data set, we calculated the correlation between tFA and expression level for each gene. The correlation of expression of each gene to tFA was similar across data sets (Supplementary Fig. 3 online), suggesting the existence of a common mechanism involved in the generation or maintenance of aneuploidy. 
We derived a 'CIN score' for 10,151 genes present on multiple platforms by combining the ranked level of correlation of each gene to tFA in multiple data sets from diverse tumor types (see Methods). The gene with highest CIN score, TPX2 , has a key role in chromosomal segregation and causes polyploidization when overexpressed [21]. The second-highest ranked, PRC1 , encodes a regulator of cytokinesis [22] and a putative substrate of the product of another top-ranking gene, CDC2 (ref. 23). FOXM1 encodes a transcriptional regulator of genes involved in chromosomal segregation and cytokinesis [24], such as KIF20A (ref. 25), which also has one of the highest CIN scores. In fact, the list of 70 top-ranking genes contains an array of key regulators that maintain faithful replication and segregation of chromosomes, including AURKB , NEK2 , H2AFX , CDC20 , ZWINT , CCNB1 , CCNB2 and AURKA (Supplementary Table 1 online). Therefore, these genes may represent members of one or more functional modules, the overexpression of which causes or is associated with CIN. 
We examined the ability of the top-ranked genes to predict clinical outcome in the 18 aforementioned cancer data sets. We stratified patients into two groups based on the expression of the top 25 or 70 genes with the highest CIN score (designated the CIN25 and CIN70 signatures, respectively) (Fig. 1d,e). This simple classifier (CIN25) was a significant predictor of clinical outcome in 12 of the 18 data sets representing breast cancer [1, 2, 3, 4, 5], lung cancer [6], medulloblastoma [10], glioma [7, 9, 12], mesothelioma [8] and lymphoma [11] (Fig. 2). (Nonsignificant predictions are shown in Supplementary Fig. 4 online.) We obtained similar results using the CIN70 signature (13 of 18 data sets were stratified according to clinical outcome; data not shown). 
We next evaluated the CIN25 and CIN70 signatures in data from a study that examined primary tumors and metastatic foci from several solid tumor types [26]. The metastasis samples expressed a higher level of the CIN25 signature than did the primary tumors (P = 0.0067, Fig. 3 and Supplementary Methods online). The same analysis using the CIN70 signature gave a similar result (P = 0.0035; data not shown). Furthermore, we observed a subset of primary tumors with higher relative expression of the signatures, consistent with the hypothesis that the metastatic expression profile originates in primary tumors and is maintained in the distant metastases. 
Clinically, the degree of malignancy is thought to be reflected by tumor grade, which is a subjective histological assessment of cellular differentiation and proliferation. We examined the relationship between the CIN25 signature and tumor grade in three breast cancer data sets [1, 2, 3] for which tumor grade data were available. We stratified grade 1 and grade 2 tumors according to their CIN25 signature expression and found that high-CIN25 tumors within each of these grade categories were associated with a worse clinical outcome (Fig. 4). However, grade 3 tumors were uniformly associated with high CIN25 signature expression and could not be separated using this measure. This result supports the recent suggestion that histopathological grading might be refined or replaced by gene expression signatures, which more accurately reflect patient outcome [1]. 
Because many of the genes we identified as associated with CIN are periodically expressed during the mitotic cell cycle, it was formally possible that the prognostic ability of the CIN signature was due to its detection of proliferation rate rather than to its detection of CIN itself. Previous work has examined genome-wide patterns of gene expression over time in synchronized HeLa cells [27]. Each gene was assigned a score proportional to the periodicity of its expression over the time points following synchronization [27]. We considered 888 unique genes (represented by 1,133 clones on the cDNA microarrays used) to be cell cycle regulated; these had cell cycle scores exceeding an empirically determined false discovery rate (FDR) threshold [27]. The total expression level of these genes in a tissue sample is thought to be a surrogate measure of cell proliferation rate, which is associated with poor prognosis in human cancer [27]. 
The CIN score and cell cycle scores were modestly correlated over 10,795 matched measurements representing 5,484 unique genes (r = 0.186), although the genes with the highest CIN scores were more likely to have high cell cycle scores (Fig. 5a). To compare the utility of the CIN score and the cell cycle score for choosing predictive genes, we systematically dissected the two signatures. 
First, we divided the 70 genes with the highest CIN scores (CIN70) into a set that was considered cell cycle regulated (CIN70_CC), and one that was not (CIN70_noCC) (Fig. 5a). We found that the CIN70_noCC group generated significant outcome predictions in 10 of the 18 tested cohorts, whereas the CIN70_CC group did so in 11. Therefore, the predictive ability of the CIN70 signature was not solely due to the inclusion of cell cycle-regulated genes. We then split the set of cell cycle-regulated genes into two groups based on their mean CIN score (Fig. 5a). Although the high-CIN cell cycle group generated significant predictions in 11 of 18 cohorts tested, the low CIN-score group worked in only five (Fig. 5b and Supplementary Fig. 5 online). 
We evaluated functional categories representing specific aspects of the cell cycle implicated in CIN [14, 15] for CIN score enrichment relative to the set of cell cycle genes. Gene sets representing the mitotic spindle assembly ( P = 0.003), spindle checkpoint (P = 0.00078) and DNA damage checkpoint (P = 0.048) had significantly greater CIN scores than the cell cycle genes (Fig. 5c), consistent with the hypothesis that overexpression of these specific cell cycle control genes is associated with CIN and is not simply due to an increased proportion of mitotic cells. Gene sets representing DNA repair, centrosome duplication and chromosome segregation were not significantly enriched in CIN score relative to cell cycle-regulated genes ( P = 0.52, 0.64, 0.99, respectively). 
We also evaluated the gene sets with CIN score enrichment for enrichment in cell cycle score [27] (Fig. 5d). While the mitotic spindle assembly and spindle checkpoint gene sets showed strong enrichment for cell cycle score, the DNA damage checkpoint gene set showed only modest enrichment. The fact that DNA damage checkpoint genes are not cell cycle regulated but tend to be overexpressed in aneuploid tumors suggests that transcriptional induction of the DNA damage checkpoint is specifically associated with CIN. This result was in agreement with a previous finding that activation of the DNA damage checkpoint in preneoplastic and neoplastic lesions is not directly related to the proliferative status of tumor cells [28]. 
There was also an overlap of four genes between our CIN25 signature and a previously described 44-gene 'proliferation cluster' [29] that is overexpressed in high-grade tumors [29]. Multivariate analysis confirmed that the CIN signature had greater prognostic relevance (Supplementary Fig. 6 online), and systematic dissection of the proliferation cluster demonstrated that its prognostic utility was due to its inclusion of high-CIN score genes (Supplementary Fig. 7 online). 
The overexpression of the CIN signature in cells with high levels of aneuploidy may be due to at least three distinct mechanisms. It is possible that cells with aberrant DNA content produce more of the machinery required for chromosomal duplication and segregation. Alternatively, the expression level of the CIN signature may reflect a compensatory mechanism for impaired functioning of the machinery responsible for maintaining the integrity of genetic information at the chromosomal level. This possibility would provide potential targeting strategies for cancer treatment. A third possibility is that the overexpression of the CIN genes allows cells to complete mitosis unimpeded by the usual checkpoints, thus conferring both direct proliferative advantage and increased cellular heterogeneity. 
Our results focus attention on a specific set of genes involved in cellular processes critical for maintenance of genome integrity that are relevant both biologically and clinically. The CIN signature stratifies multiple tumor types according to clinical outcome across tumor grade and shows elevated expression in metastatic foci, suggesting the importance of these genes in defining a more aggressive cancer phenotype. Dissecting the mechanisms by which CIN arises and contributes to the malignant phenotype remains a major challenge in cancer research. By identifying specific genes associated with CIN, we hope to elucidate a key process underlying malignant transformation. In addition, these results support the more widespread application of chromosomal instability measures in clinical diagnostics, which have been rarely used owing to technical difficulty and unclear significance [16]. Finally, this work identifies important cellular targets that may yield broadly applicable therapies. 
Methods 
Integration of gene expression data sets. 
The methods used to integrate and normalize the microarray data sets are given in Supplementary Methods. 
Functional aneuploidy measure. 
For a given data set, all of the normalized gene expression measurements present on the microarray and mapping to a given chromosomal cytoband region were grouped into a set designated 'B' (short for band). The rest of the genes, localized elsewhere on the genome, were grouped into a set 'G' (short for genome). The functional aneuploidy measure for the given cytoband is the value of Student's t statistic comparing sets B and G: 
[eq. 1]t = [mu] B - [mu] G ([sigma]2 B /N B )+([sigma]2 G /NG ) 
where [mu] is the mean, [sigma] 2 is the variance and N is the number of genes within a set. This process was iterated for each gene expression profile in a given data set such that we obtained a matrix of t statistics for each of 300 cytobands per array. If fewer than ten genes were present in a given cytoband, then we considered the statistical measure unreliable, and that cytoband was eliminated from further analysis. This left 200-250 features per sample in a given data set, depending on the coverage of the microarray platform used. 
'Total functional aneuploidy' (tFA) is the sum of all functional aneuploidy magnitudes (the absolute t statistics) in a given tumor sample, giving a single measure of spatially coordinated transcriptional activity. 
Derivation of the CIN25 signature. 
First, we calculated, for each data set, the tFA for each sample. We then computed for all genes the correlation coefficient across all samples between each gene's expression vector and the tFA vector. We considered only the 10,151 genes measured on each of the Affymetrix U133A, U133+2 and Rosetta 25k microarray platforms. We then ranked the genes in each data set by their correlation with tFA. Ranks were normalized within each data set such that the gene with the highest (positive) correlation had rank 1.0 and the gene with lowest (negative) correlation had rank 0. We then selected three of the data sets representing diverse tumor types (breast [10], ovarian [13] and small-cell lung carcinoma [13]), with the highest coverage of the transcriptome (for which we had greater confidence in our computations of functional aneuploidy and tFA), and we summed the ranks of each gene to derive the final integrated ranking (Supplementary Fig. 3). The top 25 genes from this ranking formed the CIN25 signature. The CIN70 signature was derived in a similar manner using the 70 top-ranked genes. 
Note: Supplementary information is available on the Nature Genetics website . 
Author Contributions 
S.L.C. and Z.S. conceived of and designed the study. S.L.C. carried out all the analysis. S.L.C. and Z.S. wrote the manuscript. A.C.E., I.S.K. and L.N.H. provided guidance and participated in the preparation of the manuscript. 
Caption(s): 
Figure 1: Schematic overview of the process used to derive and apply a gene expression signature of chromosomal instability. [see PDF for image] 
(a ) Published microarray data sets from various microarray platforms were integrated for the analysis. (b ) Profiles of functional aneuploidy were computed for each tumor as described in the text. Shown are two examples with low (left) and high (right) levels of total functional aneuploidy (tFA). The color and intensity of the individual cytobands indicate the direction and magnitude of the differential expression of the genes contained in the given chromosomal region. ( c ) Heat map showing expression of the 500 genes most correlated with tFA in a single data set. (d ) Heat map showing normalized expression levels of the CIN25 signature genes for a cancer-associated data set. Tumors with an above-average level of CIN25 signature net expression are predicted to have a poor clinical outcome (as indicated by the bar at the bottom). (e ) Censored survival (Kaplan-Meier) curves for each predicted category. 
Figure 2: The CIN25 signature predicts survival in 12 independent cohorts representing six cancer types. [see PDF for image] 
Data sets are identified by the first author of the published manuscript and the type of cancer profiled. P values correspond to the log-rank test comparing the survival curves generated from the CIN25 signature as a categorical predictor. 
Figure 3: Metastatic foci expressed higher levels of the net CIN25 signature than primary tumors of diverse origin. [see PDF for image] 
Shown are cumulative density plots of CIN25 expression for the primary tumors (green) and metastases (red). The vertical dashed line indicates the average level of the CIN25 signature's net expression for all samples. The P value assessing the significance of increased expression of the CIN25 signature in metastases was calculated from a one-sided t test, as decreased expression would contradict our previous results that the CIN signature is associated with a more advanced tumor phenotype. A subset of the primary tumors showed elevated levels of CIN25 signature expression, possibly indicating higher malignant potential in these tumors. 
Figure 4: The CIN25 signature stratifies three independent cohorts of grade 2 breast tumors according to clinical outcome, and one cohort of grade 1 breast tumors. [see PDF for image] 
The CIN25 signature did not stratify any of the grade 3 cohorts according to clinical outcome, despite the presence of heterogeneity in clinical outcome among these tumors. P values correspond to the log-rank test comparing each pair of survival curves. 
Figure 5: The ability of CIN genes to predict clinical outcome is independent of their cell cycle score. [see PDF for image] 
(a ) A plot of cell cycle score versus CIN score shows modest overall correlation. Gene sets were formed by imposing combined thresholds on CIN score and cell cycle score: CIN70_noCC (red, the CIN70 genes with the 41 cell cycle-regulated genes removed). The 764 unique cell cycle-regulated genes were divided into two groups, based on whether their CIN score was above or below average relative to the cell cycle group (blue and turquoise, termed CC_highCIN and CC_lowCIN, respectively). (b ) Comparison of prediction performance of various gene sets. Each bar indicates the log-rank test statistic comparing the survival curves corresponding to the two prognosis classes generated using the indicated gene set for outcome prediction. The CC_highCIN signature generated significant predictions for 11 data sets, and the CIN70-noCC was effective in 10, confirming that the general prognostic power of the CIN genes is not due to a direct association with proliferation. The CC_lowCIN signature classified only five data sets significantly. (c ) Gene categories implicated in the faithful propagation of genomic information, such as mitotic spindle assembly, spindle checkpoint and DNA damage checkpoint, are enriched for high CIN scores, relative to all cell cycle-regulated genes (one-sided Wilcoxon test, P = 0.003, P = 0.00078, P = 0.048, respectively). (Gene category membership is based on NCBI Entrez Gene as of 25 April 2006.) The cumulative density of CIN scores is plotted for the genes in the indicated categories. (d ) Although the mitotic spindle assembly and spindle checkpoint gene sets show high enrichment for cell cycle score, the DNA damage checkpoint gene set showed only modest enrichment. Shown are cumulative density plots of cell cycle score for the clones mapping to genes in the indicated categories. 

