Abstract
Data from gene expression arrays hold an enormous amount of biological information. We sought to determine if global gene expression in primary breast cancers contained information about biologic, histologic, and anatomic features of the disease in individual patients. Microarray data from the tumors of 129 patients were analyzed for the ability to predict biomarkers [estrogen receptor (ER) and HER2], histologic features [grade and lymphatic-vascular invasion (LVI)], and stage parameters (tumor size and lymph node metastasis). Multiple statistical predictors were used and the prediction accuracy was determined by cross-validation error rate; multidimensional scaling (MDS) allowed visualization of the predicted states under study. Models built from gene expression data accurately predict ER and HER2 status, and divide tumor grade into high-grade and low-grade clusters; intermediate-grade tumors are not a unique group. In contrast, gene expression data is inaccurate at predicting tumor size, lymph node status or LVI. The best model for prediction of nodal status included tumor size, LVI status and pathologically defined tumor subtype (based on combinations of ER, HER2, and grade); the addition of microarray-based prediction to this model failed to improve the prediction accuracy. Global gene expression supports a binary division of ER, HER2, and grade, clearly separating tumors into two categories; intermediate values for these bio-indicators do not define intermediate tumor subsets. Results are consistent with a model of regional metastasis that depends on inherent biologic differences in metastatic propensity between breast cancer subtypes, upon which time and chance then operate.
Access provided by University of British Columbia
Introduction
Several genes contribute to the genesis of breast cancer when their function is altered by mutation or over-expression. Among them are HER2 (erbB2), p53, BRCA1 and BRCA2, and others [1–5]. The estrogen receptor (ER) is highly expressed in a fraction of breast cancer tissues, far in excess of the expression level seen in normal breast epithelium. Over-expression and altered signaling by ER appears to contribute to tumor formation or progression by providing mitogenic signals in response to circulating estrogen [6]. A picture is beginning to form of early molecular events disturbing normal mammary epithelial growth and participating in cancer.
In contrast, molecular events that underlie breast cancer progression are not as fully characterized. Breast cancer can metastasize to the regional lymph nodes, to distant organs such as lung, liver, and brain, or to both regional and distant sites. Metastasis to distant organ sites is highly lethal and together with response to therapy determines patient outcome for the majority of women with breast cancer. The factors that determine the metastatic potential of a tumor, either for spread to lymph nodes or distant sites, are unclear. A prevalent hypothesis holds that metastasis is affected by molecular events selected in rare clones of the primary tumor that metastasize. If this is true and metastasis-capable clones comprise a small proportion of the primary, then metastasis might not be predictable from analysis of the bulk primary tumor. An alternative hypothesis holds that capacity for metastasis is largely determined by the sum of molecular changes that characterize the majority of cells in the primary tumor. In this case, metastasis is predictable and clinically useful biomarkers are discoverable. While stated as highly contrasting, these hypotheses reflect current thought and investigation.
Neither of these models considers the role of chance. If metastasis is largely a stochastic event that becomes more likely with time, then even a comprehensive analysis of primary tumors will not yield a reliable prediction of metastasis, and proposing a metastasis-capable clone of cells may not be necessary. The truth probably lies somewhere in the middle. Metastasis, either regional or distant, may be a function of inherent probability to metastasize, the number of tumor cells with this tendency and the amount of time for actualization.
Disease-specific mortality is the most accurate measure of the metastatic process in human breast cancer. However, in the absence of distant metastasis at diagnosis, axillary lymph node status is the most powerful prognostic factor for recurrence and mortality [7–9]. This parameter is determined pathologically for most patients with invasive breast cancer at the time of initial treatment. Long-term outcome requires years of clinical follow-up and competing causes for mortality may obscure disease-specific mortality. Finally, the analysis of the determinants of metastasis is confounded by inconsistent and changing treatment regimens, which may alter outgrowth of micrometastatic cells and survival. Regional lymph node status determined at the time of diagnosis may be a practical, if imperfect surrogate for the process of metastasis.
While assumed that nodal metastasis reflects biological properties in the tumor (e.g., motility, invasiveness, etc.), the presence of lymph node metastasis is best predicted by tumor size and the presence of lymphatic invasion, features that are largely based on anatomic observations and are likely independent of tumor biology. Molecular factors are not as powerful in predicting the presence of nodal metastasis [10–12]. For instance, in 2,282 patients with invasive breast cancer, tumor size, nuclear grade, and the presence of lymphatic or vascular channel invasion (LVI) in the primary cancer were the factors predicting axillary node involvement [12]. In a meta-analysis of the relationships between prognostic factors and lymph node status, molecular markers such as ER, PR, and erbB-2 (HER2) did not correlate with node involvement [13]. Hierarchical clustering of prognostic factors tended to segregate node status, tumor size, and vascular emboli (in the primary tumor) together and distinct from proliferation markers, proteolytic enzymes, and hormone receptors [14]. Because of these and other considerations, it was argued that lymph node status, like tumor size, reflects the age of the primary tumor and metastasis is a time-dependent event [14–16].
The lack of molecular biomarkers that predict nodal status may reflect insufficient numbers of candidate markers and the constraint of testing one or a few markers in each experiment. Development of DNA array technology allows testing the expression of thousands of genes simultaneously and can explore higher order patterns or profiles in the expression data. Characteristics involving two-phenotypes have been accurately predicted using DNA arrays, e.g., AML versus ALL in leukemia, colon cancer versus normal colon tissues, normal versus neoplastic prostate cancer, normal versus neoplastic ovarian tissues, and poor prognosis versus good prognosis breast cancer [17–21]. Gene expression profiling of primary tumors was able to separate breast cancers into different subtypes, and these subtypes had very different outcomes [22–25]. These results support the concept that molecular information in a primary tumor can contribute to prediction of metastasis. Whether molecular indicators of prognosis are associated with or independent from anatomic staging prognostic factors has not been determined.
Using tumor size, presence or absence of detectable LVI, and axillary lymph node status as practical endpoints, we looked for molecular profiles imbedded in primary cancers, which were capable of accurately predicting these anatomic staging features. Success would support the hypothesis that tumor growth and metastatic capability, as reflected by tumor size and nodal metastasis, is dependent upon and predictable from molecular characteristics in the primary tumor. If the ability to predict these features cannot be reasonably attained from comprehensive molecular data of the primary tumor, this may suggest that tumor biology is not the only factor determining tumor size or lymph node spread and that tumor stage is time-dependent and somewhat independent of tumor biology. The methodology we used is a global profile of gene expression furnished by commercial oligonucleotide arrays (Affymetrix Inc., Santa Clara, CA, USA). The data produced by these arrays was analyzed with computational software dChip developed by Li and Wong and optimized for Affymetrix expression array construction [26]. Advanced analytic methods including Recursive Support Vector Machine (R-SVM) and logistic regression were then used to predict several states, both biological and anatomic, including ER, HER2, LVI, tumor size, and nodal metastasis, and to evaluate the contribution of these statuses to the prediction of lymph node metastasis.
Materials and methods
Tissue samples
Tissue samples annotated with clinical data were obtained under an IRB approved protocol (Partners IRB No. 2000-P-001448). Only primary tumors were studied. Some of the tumor samples used in this study have been published previously; the source of the samples and their handling were described in these studies [27–29]. Cases were chosen from women with primary, untreated breast cancer in whom the axillary lymph node status was known, and the cohort balanced for nodal status. Node positive patients were those with at least one node containing a tumor deposit of >2 mm (N1 or N2). Node negative patients were those with pathologically negative nodes (N0) after complete dissection or sentinel lymph node mapping and biopsy. Samples from patients with only micrometastasis, defined as metastatic deposits <2 mm, were excluded. Frozen tumor tissue blocks were thin-sectioned and stained; blocks judged to contain at least 70% viable tumor by area were selected for analysis. After selection, 129 tissue samples were processed further.
Histologic sections were reviewed and scored blindly by a breast pathologist (A.R.). Histology of the invasive tumor (ductal, lobular or mixed ductal, and lobular), modified Bloom Richardson grade (B–R grades I, II, and III), and detection of LVI (present or absent) were recorded. Tumor size was recorded from the largest tumor dimension measured by gross pathologic evaluation. Immunohistochemical-stained sections for ER and HER2 from the pathology archive were re-reviewed and scored on a three-tier system (negative, low-positive, and positive). For ER, positive tumors were those containing 10–100% of cells with positively staining nuclei, low-positive contained 1–9% stained nuclei, and negative tumors showed no nuclear staining in any cells. HER2 tumors were scored as positive (3+) by immunohistochemistry if they contained strong and complete membrane staining in >10% of cells, low-positive (2+) if weak to moderate complete membrane staining in >10% of cells, or negative (0 or 1+) if there was no or only partial membrane staining or complete membrane staining in <10% of cells. For pathohistologic classification of tumor subtype (Table 1), a two tiered (positive and negative) system was used in which ER low-positive tumors were considered positive for ER and HER2 low positive 2+ tumors were considered negative for HER2. 
Table 1 Definition of tumor subtypes
Full size table
Preparation of cRNA and expression analysis
RNA extraction, cRNA target preparation and expression array hybridization were performed as previously described [28]. Briefly, thick sections from frozen blocks were homogenized with a Mini-Bead Beater (Bio-Spec Products, Bartlesville, OK, USA) and total bulk RNA extracted by the Trizol method (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) and further purified using RNAeasy columns (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA). cRNA target preparation, hybridization to Affymetrix U133 plus 2.0 arrays and washing, and array signal acquisition were performed at the DF/BWH Cancer Center microarray core facility. The complete array dataset is deposited at www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/ (Accession number GSE5460).
Raw gene expression values were obtained using Affymetrix GeneChip software and further analyzed using the DNA-Chip Analyzer (dChip) [26]. Individual probe signals were normalized by Invariant Set Normalization method and the expression level of probe sets were calculated by Model-Based Expression method [26]. By analyzing each hybridization pair within a probe set, standard errors of intensity measurement were calculated for each probe. In this way, outliers (individual probes and entire chips) can be identified and excluded from further analysis. The dChip software is available for academic use at http://www.dChip.org/.
We used dChip to normalize and generate expression values of each probe set, after that we filtered the genes by the following steps: expression values below 1 were truncated to 1, and all expression values were log transformed. After the transformation, genes whose mean intensity values across all samples <4 or coefficient of variation (SD divided by mean) below 0.1 were removed. After the filtering steps, 12,229 probe sets were selected for the following studies.
Definition of tumor subtype
Hierarchical clustering as previously described [28, 29] separates breast tumors into several major clusters. These microarray-defined clusters are highly associated with and can be largely reproduced using different combinations of pathologically determined biomarker (ER, HER2) expression and histologic features (grade). For this study, we classified tumors into six biologic subtypes based on modified Bloom–Richardson grade and immunohistochemical detection of ER and HER2 expression (Table 1).
Statistical methods
Pattern recognition is challenging when the number of measurements is high (usually more than 10,000 genes) and the number of samples is low (at most several hundred samples). In this analysis, we used the R-SVM algorithm to select genes that can best separate different subtypes of patients, and estimated the model prediction error at the same time [30]. R-SVM is based on the linear SVM classifier, which aims at finding an optimal hyperplane to separate the classes in the high-dimensional gene space with the generalization ability maximized and over-fitting avoided [32]. R-SVM uses the weighted difference of means of genes in the SVM decision function to evaluate the relative importance of genes, and eliminates unimportant genes iteratively by a backward feature elimination process. SVM-based predictions function well on small sample sets in high-dimensional spaces [31, 32]. The accuracy of the R-SVM predictor was evaluated using a stringent external Leave-One-Out Cross-Validation (LOOCV) scheme, that is, leaving a test sample out before any gene selection in the cross-validation experiments. In our application, we allowed the R-SVM to start with the 12,229 probe sets (genes) and then recursively select genes that contribute most to the classification. For details of the R-SVM algorithm, please refer to [30] and http://www.stanford.edu/group/wonglab/RSVMpage/R-SVM.html.
To corroborate the results based on R-SVM, we used other classification schemes such as Bayesian binary prediction tree [33], random forest [34], and weighted voting [17] and confirmed our observations are not specific to the R-SVM method. The Bayesian binary prediction tree method [33] generates recursive partitions of the samples into subgroups (the leaves of the classification tree) and associates Bayesian predictive probabilities of outcomes with each subgroup. The Random Forest algorithm [34] builds the prediction from multiple classification trees trained on bootstrapped subsets of samples and random subsets of input variables (genes), evaluated with the remaining samples as test sets. The weighted voting procedure [17] uses a subset of “informative genes” selected according to their correlation with the class distinction and makes the prediction by voting with the expression levels of these genes in a new sample. Each informative gene casts a “weighted vote” for one of the classes, with the weight of each vote depending on the degree of the gene’s correlation with the class distinction in the training data.
In order to assess the significance of the classification error rates, a permutation analysis was used. The two-category status labels of each patient were randomly permuted, keeping the proportion of cases in each category the same as in the true data set. We created 1,000 such data sets and applied the same R-SVM method and cross-validation separately, thereby generating 1,000 estimates of misclassification error rates on randomly permuted data. The observed error rate for the true data set was then compared to the distribution of the 1,000 estimates on permuted data to obtain the permutation P-value.
To visualize gene expression data we used multidimensional scaling (MDS) [35] with the genes selected by R-SVM to generate two-dimensional (2D) displays. Three-dimensional MDS was also evaluated for each prediction model and showed similar results (not shown).
Logistic Regression was used to study the correlation between clinical-pathological phenotypes and node status [36]. When given a set of clinical-pathological features, LOOCV based on Logistic regression was used to calculate the error rate of prediction. Since the variation of the error rate calculated by LOOCV with a small dataset is large, it is not reliable to directly compare the LOOCV error rates of different combinations of tumor features. We adopted the strategy published by Tian et al. to calculate the 95% confidence interval of the difference between the LOOCV error rates of two different combinations of features [37]. We used bootstrap to generate 100 datasets from the original dataset [38]. For each dataset, we calculate the LOOCV node prediction error rates based on different combinations of features and then calculate the difference between every two-error rates. If the 95% confidence interval of the difference does not cover 0, the difference between the two models is significant.
Results
Use of primary tumor gene expression data to predict biologic tumor features
Expression array data were used to predict features of primary breast cancers. Previous studies have shown robust signatures from possession of the ER [22, 39]. Based on the expression of the 12,229 probe sets, the R-SVM was able to separate ER-positive (10–100% nuclear staining) from ER-negative (no staining), HER2-positive (3+) from HER2-negative (1+ and 0 staining), and B–R grade I from B–R grade III (controlled by limiting to ER-positive tumors). The best accuracies for these classifications (estimated by LOOCV) were 98, 93, and 93%, respectively, reached at different gene selection levels. At the uniform level of ∼50 genes (probe sets), the accuracies were 97, 91, and 89%, respectively. However, the best accuracies for distinguishing grade I from grade II tumors or grade II from grade III tumors were somewhat lower, 73 and 75%, respectively.
Based on genes selected by R-SVM, each sample was visualized in 2D space using MDS. In Fig. 1A, ER-positive tumors cluster together and are easily distinguished from ER-negative cancers. When ER-low positive (1–9% nuclear staining) tumors are included, most are widely distributed across the same gene space as the high-level expression ER-positive tumors; only two ER low-positive tumors are intermediate between the positive and negative clusters. Figure 1B demonstrates the ability of genes selected by R-SVM to distinguish HER2-positive (3+) from HER2-negative (0 and 1+ staining) cancers. Cases with 2+ (low positive) HER2 staining were predicted as HER2 negative and fell within the same gene expression space as the HER2 negative cases. Interestingly, genes selected by training the SVM on the feature of HER2 expression clearly distinguish two groups of HER2 negative tumors. The green circle on the lower right (Fig. 1B), clearly separable from the HER2 positive tumors, includes all of the HER2 negative tumors that are also ER-negative and correspond to basal-like tumors. 
Fig. 1
 
Two-dimensional MDS display of R-SVM results for discriminating various features. (A) ER-negative tumors (ER n, green dots); ER low-positive tumors (ER lp, blue dots); ER-positive tumors (ER p, red dots). (B) HER2-negative tumors (HER2 n, green dots); HER2 2+ low-positive tumors (HER2 lp, blue dots); HER2 3+ positive tumors (HER2 p, red dots). The green circle includes a subgroup of the samples that contain all the HER2-negative tumors that are ER-negative. (C) Grade I tumors (I, green dots); grade II tumors with lobular histology [II (A), blue stars]; grade II tumors that were either HER-2-positive or ER-negative [II (A), blue squares]; grade II tumors with ductal histology that were ER-positive and HER2-negative [II (C), blue circles]; grade III tumors (III, red dots). The green arc encompasses grade I tumors and grade II tumors with lobular histology. The red arc encompasses grade III tumors and the majority of grade II ER-negative or grade II HER2-positive tumors. The blue circle encompasses the grade II ductal tumors that are ER-positive and HER2-negative and are intermediate between grade I and grade III tumors. (D) Lymph node-negative tumors (Node n, green dots); lymph node-positive tumors (Node p, red dots). (E) LVI-absent tumors (LVI-, green dots); LVI-present tumors (LVI+, red dots). (F) Tumor size less than or equal to 2 cm (≤2 cm, green dots); tumor size larger than 2 cm (>2 cm, red dots)
Full size image
Figure 1C shows the scaled positions in 2D space of all tumor samples according to the genes selected by R-SVM to distinguish Bloom–Richardson grade I from grade III samples. As ER-negative tumors are predominantly grade III, the R-SVM for grade was trained on only ER-positive tumors to correct for this major confounder. After model training, all tumors including the ER-negative cases were included in the prediction testing and MDS display.
The 2D MDS distribution of all of the tumors based on R-SVM prediction of grade revealed several interesting findings. In Fig. 1C, we see that grade I and III tumors are clearly separated. The grade II tumors are distributed widely across the grade I and III tumors, and do not form a distinct intermediate group, implying that some grade II tumors are very similar to grade I tumors and others are more similar to grade III tumors. MDS in three dimensions was similar and also failed to show grade II tumors as a distinct group (not shown). However, when other features of the grade II tumors are considered, we observed that all of the grade II tumors with lobular histology (blue stars) fell completely within the region of grade I tumors, and all of the grade II tumors that were either HER2-positive or ER-negative (blue squares) fell completely within the region of grade III tumors. Only the grade II tumors with ductal histology that were ER-positive and HER2-negative (blue circles) could not be clearly assigned into one of two major grade categories. These grade II tumors that could not be re-classified into either grade I or III based on standard histologic or immunophenotypic criteria were a small proportion of all grade II tumors.
Use of primary tumor gene expression data to predict anatomic tumor features
In contrast to the results above, SVM performed poorly at distinguishing tumors that were node-negative from node-positive, LVI-present from LVI-absent, and size less than 2 cm from larger than 2 cm. When using all the 12,229 probe sets, the accuracies were 66, 59, and 73%, respectively, and optimizing with feature selection only minimally improved these accuracies. The permutation P-value for the lymph node prediction accuracy (66%) was 0.003. Although the level of accuracy for lymph node status prediction is not satisfying, the SVM prediction model based solely on gene expression within the primary tumor is statistically significantly better than chance. Also the classification results of other prevailing methods mentioned in Materials and Methods are comparable with that of R-SVM; the best accuracies for Bayesian binary prediction tree, random forest, and weighted voting were 68, 67, and 62%, respectively. Further, we used R-SVM to separately predict positive nodal status and negative nodal status and achieved equivalent accuracy, indicating that the errors were not in one category more than the other. As visualized by MDS, node status, the presence of LVI and tumor size produced substantially overlapping clusters (Fig. 1D–F).
Univariant associations with nodal status
To further examine the predictability of lymph node metastasis, we first determined which factors were significantly associated with nodal status. Table 2 shows the association of different clinical and pathologic variables with nodal status; variables with a significant positive association are highlighted in bold. The most significant associations were with tumor size (P = 4 × 10−7), the presence of LVI (P = 1.8 × 10−5), and tumor biologic subtype (as determined by a combination of ER, HER2 and grade) (P = 0.0006). ER expression alone was marginally significant (P = 0.0263). Grade, tumor histology, and HER2 expression as single variables were not associated with the presence of node metastasis in this group of tumors. 
Table 2 Clinical and molecular features of breast cancers, according to node status
Full size table
Multivariable prediction models for nodal status
To assess the value-added of using multiple individual factors, we used logistic regression to build multivariate models of node prediction using the features that were significantly associated with node metastasis by univariate analysis. The features considered in modeling were tumor size, LVI, and membership in subtypes described by ER, HER2 protein expression, and histologic grade. We also included the R-SVM lymph node prediction output as a variable representative of the microarray expression data. The prediction accuracy results for the best multivariate models that were tested are shown in Table 3. Comparison of the confidence intervals for prediction determined the significant difference in prediction accuracy between any two models (Table 4). 
Table 3 The accuracy of different models in predicting node status
Full size table
Table 4 Comparison of models to predict node status
Full size table
The multivariate model that gave the highest prediction accuracy was the one that included tumor size, LVI status, and tumor subtype (accuracy, 78%). This prediction model was significantly better than the model based on R-SVM gene expression analysis alone (accuracy, 66%). Furthermore, when given the presence of tumor size, LVI, and biologic subtype, adding R-SVM output to the model did not significantly improve the prediction accuracy. Lymph node prediction models in which tumor subtype defined by pathologic parameters was replaced by tumor clusters defined by hierarchical clustering of gene expression were not significantly different (data not shown).
High-density gene expression data of primary tumors failed to provide additional predictive power to node prediction models based largely on anatomic staging features and general tumor subtype classification. However, the cross-validation error of the best model based on the combination of tumor size, LVI, and tumor subtype is still 22%. Therefore, using the optimal prediction model for nodal status, we are still unable to achieve a satisfactorily accurate prediction of this feature.
The degree of effect of different features on nodal metastasis
Logistic regression determined that the best model for nodal status prediction included tumor size, LVI status, and biologic tumor subtype. The logistic regression parameters indicate the relative degree to which each of these variables affects nodal metastasis. Figure 2 visually depicts the relationship of these three features to nodal status based on the logistic regression model. To simplify the analysis, we grouped the three ER-positive HER-2 negative subtypes (grades I–III) into a single ER-positive group (shown in red) and the two HER2-positive subtypes (ER-negative and ER-positive) into a single HER2-positive group (shown in green), and compared these to the ER-negative HER2-negative (i.e., basal-like) subtype (shown in blue). From this analysis, we see the major effect is the strong positive association between increasing tumor size and probability of nodal positivity. The presence of LVI in the primary tumor shifts the probability curves upwards, and contributes additional probability of metastasis at all tumor sizes and for all subtypes considered. At the same tumor size and LVI status, samples in the ER-positive HER2-negative subset have the highest probability of node metastasis whereas the ER-negative HER2-negative basal-like subtype has the lowest probability. 
Fig. 2
 
Probability of node positivity according to the tumor size, LVI status, and biologic subtype. The X-axis represents tumor size in centimeters (cm); the Y-axis represents probability of node positivity. Red lines indicate the results for samples that are ER-positive and HER2-negative; Green lines indicate results for samples that are HER2-positive and either ER-positive or ER-negative; c blue lines indicate results for samples that are HER2-negative and ER-negative. Solid lines represent cases that displayed LVI (LVI+) and dashed lines represent cases without LVI (LVI−)
Full size image
Discussion
The current study investigated the ability of global gene expression in primary tumors to predict features of breast cancer. These included biological features (ER, HER2 expression, and tumor grade) and anatomic features (size, LVI, and the presence of node metastasis). Models built from gene expression data alone were able to predict ER status, HER2 status and the extremes of tumor grade, achieving accuracies exceeding 90%. In contrast, prediction of tumor size, LVI, and nodal status were much less accurate, although significantly better than chance.
Our analysis of biologic features revealed several interesting things. First, our data suggest the major division of the Bloom–Richardson grading system is between low-grade (grade I) and high-grade (grade III). Grade II tumors were not accurately distinguished from grade I or grade III tumors, but smear across the grades I–III continuum and do not occupy unique gene-space. Other tumor characteristics such as lobular histology, ER-negativity and HER2-positivity did determine whether grade II tumors grouped with grade I or with grade III tumors. All grade II lobular cancers fell within the grade I group; nearly all grade II tumors that were either HER2-positive or ER-negative were found with the grade III tumors. The vast majority of grade II tumors could be re-categorized into a simpler two-grade system (low-grade versus high-grade) using these additional pathologic features.
Clinical reports frequently subdivide ER content into negative, positive, and low-positive, or have some type of semi-quantitative measure of ER immunostaining. Similarly, HER2 is generally reported in four categories (0 through 3+). To evaluate the relationship between degrees of immunoreactivity for these markers and the effects on global gene expression, we determined the gene expression prediction algorithms that differentiate between the extremes (high-level expression versus negative) and then tested the intermediate cases. In a fashion similar to histologic grade, tumors with lower levels of expression of ER shared the gene space with other high ER expressing tumors, suggesting that even low levels of ER expression indicate membership in a global ER-positive subtype and are not a unique subset. Practically, ER low-positive cancers are much more similar to ER high-positive cancers than to the truly ER negative malignancies. The analysis of HER2 expression found the same trend toward simplification of stratification. Cases with intermediate level 2+ staining for HER2 did not form a distinct intermediate group but all fell with the HER2 negative (0 to 1+ staining) cases. This finding is consistent with observations that cases with HER2 2+ immunoreactivity are often not gene amplified, are generally poorly responsive to HER2 targeted therapies and are best considered with the HER2 negative cases.
A notable weakness of gene expression-based prediction is both for tumor size and regional node metastasis. Several reasons might be operative. First, is the possibility of inaccuracy in the pathologic assessment of tumor size or false-negative assessment of node status. However, the presence of significant associations of tumor size and LVI in the primary tumor with the presence or absence of node metastases tends to mitigate this concern (Table 2). Second, our prediction models for nodal status were tested both in a “positive” direction (predicting the presence of nodal disease) and in a “negative” direction (predicting the absence of disease), giving essentially the same degree of accuracy. Finally, the impact of time and stochastic factors cannot be neglected. For example, tumor size is theoretically a function of tumor growth rate and time. While one may anticipate that tumor growth rate could be predictable from biologic molecular features of the tumor (e.g., expression of proliferation genes), the fact that tumor size is poorly predicted from molecular features indicates that time is an equally important and unknowable determinate of tumor size. Time and chance may likewise play a determining role for the presence of LVI or nodal metastasis.
In the era prior to gene expression array analysis, several large studies were performed to explicitly look at features of primary tumors in an attempt to predict nodal status, and ultimately spare patients unnecessary axillary node surgery. Many of these studies, although older, did include biologic features such as ER, HER2 or tumor grade in the models; but nevertheless, a majority of studies concluded that tumor size and lymphatic invasion were among the most important predictive features and indicate the role of time and chance in determining metastatic spread to lymph nodes [12, 40–42].
Recent studies have revisited the issue of predicting nodal status from features of the primary tumor by using the more global analysis of gene expression arrays. In one study by Huang et al. [43], gene expression data was utilized in a Bayesian classification tree to predict lymph node status; a high level of accuracy (>90%) was reported for prediction of node status. However, this study focused on predicting the extremes of being node negative or having ten or more positive nodes. The model was not used on cases with intermediate degrees of node involvement and therefore, it is unknown how well the model would perform with the large proportion of cases that fall between these extremes. Indeed, Weigelt et al. [44] sought an expression signature predictive of nodal status in 144 node-positive and 151 node-negative cases and no predictive signature could be determined. When this group independently tested the lymph node prediction gene expression pattern of Huang et al. [43] on their independent cohort of 295 tumors, they found the prediction accuracy was only 50%, no better than chance [44].
Our study tests a number of computational models, including Bayesian binary prediction tree, random forest, weighted voting, and SVM, all operating on gene expression data from the primary tumor to predict lymph node status. These expression-based predictors gave accuracies ranging from 62 to 68%. Permutation testing indicated prediction accuracies statistically better than chance, supporting the notion of some molecular information in the primary tumor predictive of nodal metastasis. However, in multivariable regression models, we found this biologic information was best represented by categories of biologic subtype defined by commonly determined biomarkers and that more global gene expression data did not add additional prediction value.
One interesting observation was the discrepancy between the influence of tumor subtype on the probability of node metastasis and the reverse associations of subtype with distant metastatic outcome. In our dataset, the ER-positive tumors had the highest probability; HER2-positive cases were intermediate, and basal-like tumors had the lowest probability of regional metastasis at any given tumor size. In contrast, in several studies evaluating outcome among different tumor subgroups, the risk of distant recurrence is highest for basal-like and HER2 positive disease and lowest for ER-positive “luminal” type cancers [23, 24]. The difference between the risks of nodal and distant metastasis among tumor subtypes may indicate that hematogenous spread to distant sites occurs separately and in parallel with lymphatic spread to lymph nodes, rather than sequentially from lymph node metastases. Alternatively, different tumor types may have different preferred routes of metastasis; perhaps ER-positive disease tends to exit via lymphatics and basal-like cancers leave their primary site by the blood system.
Based upon this study, we believe regional metastasis depends upon the “propensity for regional metastasis” and time to affect this propensity. The propensity for regional metastasis may be indicated by inherent biological differences, best reflected by categorical subtypes of the disease, and is “predictable” to a limited degree. However, factors such as time and stochastic processes are equally important and unknowable determinants that confound our ability to predict nodal involvement with high accuracy.

