Abstract
Breast cancers can be divided into subtypes with important implications for prognosis and treatment. We set out to characterize the genetic alterations observed in different breast cancer subtypes and to identify specific candidate genes and pathways associated with subtype biology. mRNA expression levels of estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor, and HER2 were shown to predict marker status determined by immunohistochemistry and to be effective at assigning samples to subtypes. HER2+ cancers were shown to have the greatest frequency of high-level amplification (independent of the ERBB2 amplicon itself), but triple-negative cancers had the highest overall frequencies of copy gain. Triple-negative cancers also were shown to have more frequent loss of phosphatase and tensin homologue and mutation of RB1, which may contribute to genomic instability. We identified and validated seven regions of copy number alteration associated with different subtypes, and used integrative bioinformatics analysis to identify candidate oncogenes and tumor suppressors, including ERBB2, GRB7, MYST2, PPM1D, CCND1, HDAC2, FOXA1, and RASA1. We tested the candidate oncogene MYST2 and showed that it enhances the anchorage-independent growth of breast cancer cells. The genome-wide and region-specific differences between subtypes suggest the differential activation of oncogenic pathways. (Mol Cancer Res 2009;7(4):511–22)
Introduction
Identification of the genetic and epigenetic abnormalities that contribute to cancer development can lead to new therapeutic targets and strategies. Technological advances are beginning to enable researchers to profile cancers comprehensively for these abnormalities and to elucidate their functional significance. At the same time, there is an increasing understanding of the importance of cancer subtypes for prognosis and treatment. Cancer subtypes are distinct forms of a disease that have different origins, molecular characteristics, or clinical features. They often also respond differently to therapy, so higher-resolution definitions of subtypes and improved understanding of their biological differences are important for improving cancer treatment.
Breast cancer has relatively well-established and studied subtypes. Newly diagnosed cancers are routinely assessed for the expression of estrogen receptor (ER) or progesterone receptor (PR) and for overexpression or amplification of the ERBB2 gene (encoding the HER2 protein). In general, patients with ERBB2/HER2–positive (HER2+) tumors are candidates for treatment with the anti-HER2 monoclonal antibody trastuzumab (1). Patients with ER- or PR-positive tumors are candidates for treatment with hormonal therapy, including selective ER modulators such as tamoxifen for premenopausal women or aromatase inhibitors for postmenopausal women (2-4). Patients whose tumors are neither HER2+ nor ER+/PR+ (so-called triple-negative tumors) currently have no targeted therapy available and have relatively poor prognosis (5-7).
In recent years, the application of molecular profiling technologies, in particular DNA microarrays for measuring mRNA expression, has added to our knowledge of breast cancer subtypes. Hierarchical clustering with gene expression data has been shown to organize tumor samples into groups with distinct gene expression patterns and significantly different clinical outcomes (8-10). The three major subgroups defined by gene expression profiling are similar to those defined in clinical practice: a HER2+ group, a luminal group (which is predominantly ER+/PR+), and a basal-like group (which predominantly lacks HER2 overexpression, ER, and PR). The terminal duct-lobular unit of the breast, the structure from which the majority of breast cancers arise, is composed of two types of epithelial cells. The inner or luminal cells are potential milk-secreting cells and are surrounded by an outer basal layer of contractile myoepithelial cells. Basal-like breast tumors are so called because they express genes, such as cytokeratins 5, 6, and 17, that are typically expressed in normal myoepithelial cells, whereas luminal tumors are characterized by expression of more epithelial-like genes such as E-cadherin and cytokeratins 8 and 18 (7-13). Clustering also suggests higher-resolution subtypes with biologically interesting features. For example, several studies have reported subdivisions of the luminal type dubbed luminal A and luminal B (the latter has lower levels of ER transcripts and less favorable clinical outcomes). The presence of other subtypes varies more from study to study, presumably due to methodologic differences, variation between sample sets, and the instability of hierarchical clustering results. A statistically stringent meta-analysis of data from multiple gene expression studies identified three robust subtypes that closely resemble the HER2+, ER+/PR+, and triple-negative types defined in clinical practice (14).
In this study, we explore the hypothesis that breast cancers of different subtypes are both characterized and caused by different sets of genetic lesions. Beyond the associations of HER2 and hormone receptor status with the HER2+ and luminal subtypes, there are indications that distinct oncogenic alterations and pathways are associated with different breast cancer subtypes. For example, epidermal growth factor receptor overexpression and phosphatase and tensin homologue (PTEN) loss are most common in basal-like cancers (6, 7, 15-19). Amplification of CCND1 and activating mutation of PIK3CA are associated with ER and PR positivity (17, 20). In addition, the availability of genome-wide copy number profiling has made it possible to identify region-specific copy number alterations associated with clinical characteristics such as hormone receptor status, gene mutation status, disease subtype, and clinical outcome (21-25). We use high-resolution genome-wide copy number profiling and cancer gene resequencing to identify copy number alterations and somatic mutations that are associated with breast cancer subtypes in both tumors and cancer cell lines. We also characterize subtype differences in overall levels of genome alteration. We use bioinformatics methods to prioritize candidate causative genes in subtype-associated regions of copy number gain, and show that these methods can help to identify oncogenes. Finally, we relate our results to distinct patterns of oncogenic pathway activation in different subtypes.
Results
ER, PR, and HER2 mRNA Expression Levels Predict Breast Cancer Subtypes
We characterized genetic alterations in 51 breast tumors and 46 breast cancer cell lines. We set out to study the three major subtypes defined by current clinical practice: Samples with amplified or overexpressed HER2 were assigned to the HER2+ subtype; HER2 negative samples expressing ER or PR were assigned to the ER+/PR+ subtype; and other samples were assigned to the triple-negative subtype. These subtypes are determined using a simple algorithm with a clear biological basis, and their relevance to prognosis and treatment is well established.
ER, PR, and HER2 status is generally determined in clinical practice by immunohistochemistry or fluorescence in situ hybridization, but results from these approaches were available for only a fraction of the tumor samples in this study (see Materials and Methods and Supplementary Table S1). We therefore developed logistic regression classifiers for ER and PR status using microarray data for the ESR1 and PGR genes. The microarray data for these genes predicted pathologist-determined marker status very well (Supplementary Fig. S1) with error rates in the training data set of 12 of 143 for ER and 32 of 142 for PR. To infer HER2 status, we identified samples with copy gains at the ERBB2 locus or mRNA overexpression (see Materials and Methods and Supplementary Fig. S1). These procedures were used to assign 51 breast tumors to three subtypes (8 HER2+, 26 ER+/PR+, 17 triple negative). Assigning the tumors to the five main subtypes defined by gene expression data (26) gave similar results (Supplementary Table S1). None of our samples were assigned to the normal-like gene expression subtype and only one was assigned to the luminal B subtype. Our sample set is therefore insufficient to investigate these additional subtypes.
Application of the mRNA- and copy number–based classifiers to breast cancer cell lines assigned 15 lines as HER2+, 12 as ER+/PR+, and 19 as triple negative. Our assignments are in good agreement with the recent study of Neve et al. (27), which classified all of our triple-negative cell lines as basal-like and all but one of our ER+/PR+ cell lines as luminal. The results from both breast tumors and cell lines indicated that the expression levels of ESR1 and PGR are good surrogates for ER and PR status.
HER2+ and Triple-Negative Breast Tumors Exhibit Higher Copy Number Instability
To understand whether overall genomic instability differs between breast cancer subtypes, we first examined the overall frequencies of copy number alterations in tumors (Fig. 1A). The fractions of the genome exhibiting copy gains differ significantly between the subtypes (P < 0.05, when any threshold for copy number gain ≥2.8 copies is considered). Triple-negative tumors have the highest frequencies of modest gains. However, HER2+ tumors have the highest frequencies of high-level gains, which include focal amplifications. This trend is not explained simply by the ERBB2 amplicon on chromosome 17 because the same differences between the subtypes are observed when chromosome 17 is excluded from consideration (Fig. 1B). The same subtype differences were observed in cell lines (data not shown). We did not find a statistically significant difference in frequencies of copy number loss between the subtypes.

FIGURE 1. 
Associations between subtypes and genome-wide frequencies of genetic alterations. A and B. The mean fraction of the genome exhibiting gains, including and excluding chromosome 17, respectively, as different thresholds for copy gain are considered in triple-negative (red), HER2+ (green), and ER+/PR+ (blue) samples. C. Box plot of the chromosomal instability signature (CIN25) by subtype. Carter et al. (28) estimated the aneuploidy of individual cancer samples by quantifying the extent to which genes in the same chromosomal region have coordinated mRNA expression levels. The CIN25 signature is made up of genes whose expression is correlated with this measure of aneuploidy. High CIN25 values are associated with poor outcome in several tumor types.
To further characterize the differences in genomic instability among the tumor subtypes, we used a gene expression signature that reflects chromosomal instability and is associated with poor outcome in several cancer types (28). We tested whether the signature is the same in all three subtypes. We found that triple-negative and HER2+ tumors have higher expression of the instability signature than ER+/PR+ tumors (P = 0.005; Fig. 1C). This is consistent with the subtype differences in frequencies of copy number gains and also with the worse prognosis associated with HER2+ and triple-negative cancers (8-10).
Copy Number Changes Associated with Breast Cancer Subtypes
In addition to global patterns of copy number alteration, we set out to identify specific regions of copy number alteration associated with subtypes and the functionally important genes within those regions. Figure 2 shows the frequencies of gains and losses for the different subtypes as measured in tumors with Affymetrix 500k single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) arrays. We observed some differences in frequencies between subtypes similar to those described in recent studies (e.g., losses on 5q in triple negative, gains on 10p in triple negative and HER2+, gains on 11q13 in ER+/PR+; refs. 22-24). We also observed some additional differences (e.g., losses on 6q in ER+/PR+, gains on 17q21 and 17q23 in ER+/PR+ and HER2+, losses on 15p in triple negative).

FIGURE 2. 
Genome-wide gains and losses of breast tumors by subtype. Graphs show gains above the x axis (frequency times magnitude) and losses below the x axis (frequency) in triple negative (A), HER2+ (B), and ER+/PR+ (C) subtypes. Arrows, regions of subtype-associated gains; asterisks, regions of subtype-associated losses. These regions were selected based on the tumor data only, without regard to replication in cell lines.
Different frequencies of copy number alteration within a region may occur by chance and may be characteristic of one sample set but not observed in others. We sought to identify regions that were both statistically significantly associated with subtypes and observed in two independent sample sets. We first identified chromosomal regions with recurrent gains or losses (>2.5 copies or <1.6 copies in at least 10% of tumor samples) with differences in gain or loss frequency between subtypes in tumors. We then validated these regions in data from an independent set of 47 breast cancer cell lines. A total of seven chromosomal regions showed consistent association in both sample sets (Table 1; Fig. 3).

Table 1. 
Regions of Copy Number Alteration Associated with Subtype in Two Independent Sample Sets
 

FIGURE 3. 
Copy number in regions associated with subtype. Blue, losses; red, gains. The genomic intervals consistently associated with subtype in both tumors and cell lines were identified. The physically adjacent intervals with the same pattern of subtype association were merged together to form the seven regions shown. The average copy number of the merged intervals is indicated by color: blue, losses; red, gains.
Candidate Driver Genes for Subtype-Associated Regions
A recurrent region of copy number alteration typically extends over multiple genes. Identifying the driver genes (genes functionally involved in tumorigenesis) with confidence generally requires extensive experimentation. We therefore developed a computational strategy to identify candidate driver genes for experimental follow-up based on three hypotheses: first, that driver genes are found in the part of a region of recurrent copy number alteration that is most frequently and most significantly gained or lost; second, that driver genes undergo marked alterations in gene expression as a consequence of copy number change; and third, that changes in expression of driver genes may be associated with poor clinical outcome. Not all of these three hypotheses may hold for every driver gene, but combining the evidence from the three can identify candidates.
In the HER2 amplicon, for example, ERBB2 is found at the most amplified point, is overexpressed on amplification, and is associated with increased occurrence of distant metastasis in the study of van't Veer et al. (ref. 29; Fig. 4A). One other gene in the amplicon, GRB7, also meets these criteria. This may simply be because of its proximity to ERBB2, but RNA interference studies suggest that GRB7 may also contribute to proliferation of breast cancer cells (30).
 

FIGURE 4. 
Identification of candidate driver genes. A. Chromosome 17 35-Mbp region. B. Chromosome 17 45-Mb region. C. Chromosome 17 55 Mb region. D. Chromosome 11 70 Mb region. Top, summarized copy gain (red) and the locations of genes associated with distant metastasis at P < 0.05 (blue). Dotted lines define the focal region within which copy number was associated with subtype and within which driver genes were sought. Bottom, −log10 transformed P values reflecting increased gene expression on amplification. Genes passing the P value threshold (0.05) are labeled.
Applying the same procedure to other regions of copy gain identifies other candidate oncogenes. In the amplicon around 45 Mbp on chromosome 17q21 (Fig. 4B), which is associated with the ER+/PR+ and HER2+ subtypes, there is a single gene that fulfills all three criteria: MYST2, which encodes a histone acetyltransferase (HBO1) that has been implicated in the regulation of DNA synthesis and in steroid hormone receptor signaling (31-34). In the amplicon around 55 Mbp (17q23), PPM1D is the only gene meeting all three criteria, although it is not strongly supported by any individual line of evidence. The genes TMEM49 and RPS6KB1 (encoding p70 ribosomal S6 kinase) are also located under the peak of this amplification, and their expression levels are strongly associated with copy number alteration in the region (Fig. 4C). The peak of amplification around 70 Mbp on chromosome 11q13, also associated with ER+/PR+ and HER2+ subtypes, contains no genes associated with recurrence (Fig. 4D). Driver gene status is often attributed to CCND1 (encoding cyclin D1), which has significantly increased expression in amplified samples, along with the neighboring genes ORAOV1, FADD, and PPFIA1. In the region around 35 Mbp on chromosome 14q13, which is associated with the ER+/PR+ subtype, only FOXA1 has elevated expression in tumors with increased copy number (Supplementary Fig. S2A).
For regions of deletion/loss, the amplitude or the frequency of the alteration does not provide as much information as in regions of copy gain because there are at most two chromosomes to be lost and deletions are usually broad. The identification of candidates therefore relies primarily on the association of gene expression with copy number loss and clinical outcome (Supplementary Fig. S2B and C). Both these lines of evidence support the candidates ARHGAP18, HDAC2, and NCOA7 in deletions around 116 Mbp on chromosome 6q (associated with the ER+/PR+ subtype). The deletion located around 80 Mb on chromosome 5q13-14 (associated with HER2+ and triple-negative subtypes) contains a single gene supported by two lines of evidence: RASA1, which encodes the RAS GTPase activating protein p120GAP.
MYST2 Drives the Growth of Breast Cancer Cells
We selected the candidate driver gene MYST2 (also known as HBO1) for further study because it has particularly strong supporting evidence in our analysis. MYST2 is required for growth in 293T cells (31) but is not an established oncogene. Overexpression of MYST2 (Supplementary Fig. S4) dramatically enhanced the anchorage-independent growth of both MCF7 (Fig. 5A and B) and SKBR3 breast cancer cells (Fig. 5C and D). Previous studies in MCF7 cells, which have a modest copy number gain in this region, have also shown that siRNA-mediated knockdown of MYST2 substantially impairs cell proliferation and blocks progression through the S phase of the cell cycle compared with control siRNA treatment (31). Taken together, the observations that MYST2 knockdown blocks proliferation and that MYST2 overexpression can shift cell lines to a more transformed state support the hypothesis that it is the oncogene driving amplification around 45 Mbp on chromosome 17.
 

FIGURE 5. 
MYST2 overexpression enhances colony formation in soft agar. A. MCF7 colonies. Top row, cells transfected with MYST2 expression vector; bottom row, cells transfected with control vector. C. SKBR3 colonies. Left and center columns, cells transfected with MYST2 expression vector; right column, cells transfected with control vector. B and D. Box plots representing the numbers of colonies in MCF7 and SKBR3, respectively.
Association of PTEN Loss and Somatic Mutations with Breast Cancer Subtypes
We sequenced a panel of genes with well-characterized cancer-causing mutations in the cell line collection, and we evaluated both the mutations we found and published mutation data for association with breast cancer subtypes (Table 2). We observed the following overall mutation frequencies: 73% (TP53), 34% (PIK3CA), 11%(RB1), 9% (PTEN), 7% (CDKN2A), 5% (BRAF), 2% (KRAS), and 2% (HRAS). These are generally very similar to those reported in the COSMIC database (35). TP53, however, has a lower mutation rate in COSMIC (54%), so our cell line collection may have different characteristics from the 80 breast carcinoma samples that currently have data in COSMIC. We did not see evidence that mutations in TP53, PTEN, or CDKN2A are associated with specific breast cancer subtypes. PIK3CA mutations were enriched in the ER+/PR+ and HER2+ subtypes, which is consistent with previous reports (17), although this enrichment was not statistically significant.
•	View inline
•	View popup
Table 2. 
Amino Acid Mutations and PTEN Protein Loss in Breast Cancer Cell Lines
All four mutations in BRAF, KRAS, and HRAS were in triple-negative samples. This suggests an association between mutations in the RAS/RAF/mitogen-activated protein kinase/extracellular signal-regulated kinase kinase/extracellular signal–regulated kinase pathway and the triple-negative subtype (P = 0.05). An additional triple-negative cell line (CAL-51) has also been reported to harbor an activating oncogenic mutation in a RAS family member (36, 37).
Loss of PTEN has previously been reported to be associated with ER and PR negative status (15, 17, 38). Mutation and deletion at the PTEN locus are imperfect surrogates for loss of PTEN protein (15, 27), so we evaluated the association between PTEN and subtypes in cell lines by Western blot. We observed PTEN loss in 59% (10 of 17) of triple-negative samples but only in 17% (2 of 12) of ER+/PR+ samples and 8% (1 of 13) of HER2+ samples (P = 0.002). The chromosomal instability signature was higher in samples with PTEN loss than in those without, although this difference was not statistically significant (P > 0.05; data not shown).
All four mutations in RB1 were found in triple-negative samples, and we found that loss of retinoblastoma protein (RB) function is associated with the triple-negative subtype (P = 0.006). The inactivation of RB was further examined in the 51 breast tumor samples using a 59-gene expression signature reflecting RB dysregulation (39, 40). This signature was significantly higher in the triple-negative subtype than in HER2+ and ER+/PR+ subtypes (P = 0.002, Fig. 6). In addition, the chromosomal instability signature was higher in samples with RB1 mutation than in those without (P = 0.01; data not shown).
 
FIGURE 6. 
RB pathway dysregulation is associated with the triple-negative subtype. The RB signature score, reflecting pathway dysregulation, is summarized in a box plot by subtype.
Discussion
In this study, we have characterized genetic alterations associated with the three major and most reproducible breast cancer subtypes, defined by tumor ER, PR, and HER2 status. The widespread adoption of consistent and robust analysis methods and larger sample sets should make it possible to carry out a similar analysis of higher-resolution subtypes such as luminal A and luminal B.
In clinical practice, ER and PR status is generally established by immunohistochemistry, and HER2 status by immunohistochemistry or fluorescence in situ hybridization. We found that levels of ESR1 and PGR mRNAs, even when measured by microarray, can accurately predict immunohistochemistry status and be used in determining subtype. Similar conclusions were reached for HER2 and ER in a recent study (41), although the authors did not examine PR.
In this study, we used both tumor and cell line samples. Analysis of copy number was carried out primarily in tumors, with cell lines used for confirmation. Point mutations were studied in cell lines. The copy number alterations observed in cell lines have been shown to be very similar to those observed in tumors (27), but the differences that do exist have implications for our study. To select copy number alterations that are reproducibly and robustly associated with breast cancer subtypes, we required that regions discovered in tumors also be associated with subtypes in cell lines. This protects us from finding alterations induced by cell culture, but it almost certainly contributed to our false negative rate. Some of the most significant findings in tumors were not reproduced in cell lines, for example, the association of gains around 7 Mbp on 10p14-15.1 in the triple-negative and HER2+ subtypes. This may be due in part to some copy number alterations being selected against in vitro and in part to lack of statistical power. Another caveat is that cell lines believed to represent breast cancer may actually be derived from other cancers, as in the case of MDA-MB-435, which represents melanoma (42, 43) and which was not used in this study. We note that the mutations in BRAF and APC (44) observed in DU4475 are more typical of colorectal than breast cancer, and the gene expression profile of this line is not very similar to other cancers of either the large intestine or breast (data not shown).
In the seven regions of copy number alteration that we found to be reproducibly associated with subtype, we used three bioinformatics-based criteria to prioritize candidate driver genes. Such approaches can only generate hypotheses requiring further studies, but the results on regions with known driver genes are encouraging. First, we assumed that the driver gene would be found in the most recurrently and profoundly altered location in a region of alteration. It may be that local features such as repeat sequences or chromatin structure bias the exact boundaries of these regions. However, our data and other studies suggest that these boundaries vary widely between individual tumors (45-49) so that, over an adequate number of samples, the location with most copy number alteration can be used to pinpoint candidate driver genes. Our second assumption, that the expression of a driver gene should be significantly affected by copy number, is limited primarily by the finding that alterations in copy number affect the expression of a significant fraction of genes. The final assumption that the expression of a driver gene should be associated with variation in clinical outcome may be more useful for identifying very strong candidates than for excluding genes from consideration. The driver gene by definition is (or has been) beneficial to the tumor, but this benefit may not always translate into outcome, particularly because outcome may be evaluated in different ways. However, when alteration in gene expression is found to be associated with poor outcome, this provides additional reason to prioritize a gene for follow-up.
Further studies may also be informed by other features of the candidate driver genes and regions we identified. Several candidates have links to steroid hormone receptor signaling, which may contribute to the association of some regions of gain with the ER+/PR+ subtype. However, this does not offer a complete explanation because these gains are sometimes observed in ER- and PR-negative cancers. FOXA1 is the only gene significantly up-regulated upon the amplification on 14q20 associated with the ER+/PR+ subtype. It encodes a forkhead transcription factor, which is required for ER-mediated transcriptional activation of many transcriptional targets (50, 51). Within the amplicon on 17q23 (associated with ER+/PR+ and HER2+ cancers) there are several genes that have evidence of oncogenic activity (52-55). The only gene to meet all three criteria in our prioritization is PPM1D. PPM1D activity has been shown to not only lead to inactivation of mitogen-activated protein kinase and p53 but also to stimulate ER and PR activity (53), again suggesting a relationship with hormone receptor–dependent cancers. However, the 17q23 amplification also includes other candidate protein-coding oncogenes and mir-21, a microRNA gene with oncogenic properties known to be up-regulated in breast cancer (56-58). MYST2, the only gene in the amplicon on 17q21 to meet all three selection criteria, encodes the HBO1 histone acetyltransferase implicated in the regulation of DNA synthesis (31, 34, 59, 60). HBO1 has also been shown to enhance transcription mediated by steroid receptors including ER and PR (32, 33, 61). Our finding that overexpression of MYST2 enhances colony formation in soft agar by SKBR3 cells, which are HER2+, suggests that MYST2 is a bona fide oncogene that acts independently of ER and PR. Further studies are required to confirm and elucidate the relationship between MYST2 and oncogenesis.
Another candidate driver gene that fits into an emerging pattern of subtype-specific pathway activation is RASA1, which encodes the RAS GTPase activating protein p120GAP. Somatic mutations in RASA1 have been observed in basal cell carcinoma (62) and the gene is located in a region of frequent loss of heterozygosity in BRCA1 mutant breast cancers (63), which have gene expression profiles similar to those of triple-negative cancers. RASA1 is the only gene meeting all three selection criteria in the region of loss on 5q13 associated with the triple-negative and HER2+ subtypes. p120GAP activates the intrinsic GTPase activity of wild-type RAS, shifting it into its inactive GDP-bound form. Triple-negative cancers also harbor all the KRAS and BRAF activating mutations we observed and have been reported by others to be characterized by activation of epidermal growth factor receptor signaling (6, 7, 18, 19). These several lines of evidence are consistent with triple-negative cancers being more frequently dependent on activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling, suggesting they may be more susceptible to therapeutic intervention targeting this pathway.
Another interesting feature of triple-negative cancers that may have therapeutic implications is their increased genomic instability, as evidenced by frequent copy gains and the chromosomal instability expression signature. We cannot exclude the possibility that the differences we observed in genome instability between the subtypes are due to the representation of different stages of development within our tumor samples. However, we observed similar differences in instability between subtypes in cell lines. Triple-negative cancers also have more frequent alterations affecting PTEN and RB1, both of which are involved in maintaining genome integrity (64-66). Defects in cell cycle checkpoints may make triple-negative breast cancers more sensitive to cytotoxic therapy (67), particularly DNA damaging agents (39), and to other therapies that exploit defects in DNA repair (68).
Continuing advances in molecular profiling technologies are making it possible to identify the genetic and epigenetic alterations characteristic of cancer subtypes. Through integrative analysis of different data types, we can relate these alterations to the activity of oncogenic pathways and to therapeutic opportunities.
Materials and Methods
Breast Samples
Fresh frozen breast tumors with >70% tumor content were obtained from 51 patients by Gene Logic, Inc. Tumor samples were acquired from several centers and were accompanied by varying amounts of clinical data. Fixed material was not available to the authors of this study to directly evaluate HER2, ER, or PR status. The cell lines AU565, BT-474, BT-483, BT-549, CAMA-1, DU4475, HCC1143, HCC1395, HCC1419, HCC1428, HCC1500, HCC1569, HCC1806, HCC1954, HCC202, HCC2218, HCC38, HCC70, Hs578T, KPL-1, MCF7, MDA-MB-175VII, MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-361, MDA-MB-415, MDA-MB-436, MDA-MB-453, MDA-MB-468, SK-BR-3, SW527, T-47D, UACC-812, UACC-893, ZR-75-1, and ZR-75-30 were obtained from American Type Culture Collection. The cell lines CAL-120, CAL-148, CAL-51, CAL-85-1, EFM-19, EFM-192A, EVSA-T, HCC1937, HDQ-P1, JIMT-1, and MFM-223 were obtained from the Deutsche Sammlung von Mikroorganismen und Zellkulturen GmbH. All cell lines were maintained in RPMI 1640 or DMEM supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Sigma) and 2 mmol/L l-glutamine. Cell line copy number analysis (69) was carried out on genomic DNA extracted from subconfluent cell cultures using Qiagen DNAeasy kits.
Microarray Profiling
All microarrays were purchased from Affymetrix. Gene expression data were generated for all 51 tumor and 46 cell line samples with HG-U133 Plus 2.0 arrays according to the manufacturer's protocols and processed using Microarray Suite 5.0 software (Affymetrix). Where multiple probe sets were available for a gene, the probe set with the highest mean intensity was used. Tumor DNA was run on Mapping 500k SNP arrays and cell line DNA was run on Mapping 100k SNP arrays according to the manufacturer's protocols. Signal intensities were extracted using dChip 2005 (70), median centered, converted to log 2 ratios, and segmented using the GLAD R package (71). Copy numbers were calculated as 2(inferred log 2 ratio + 1). Other analyses were carried out in R5 and Spotfire (TIBCO). Microarray data are available in the National Center for Biotechnology Information Gene Expression Omnibus repository under accession nos. GSE7545, GSE12777, and GSE13696.
Breast Cancer Subtype Assignment
ER and PR classifiers were developed using gene expression data from 143 tumors (ER) and 142 tumors (PR), which had immunohistochemistry status supplied by Gene Logic. Samples for which any level of positivity was recorded were considered positive. The probe set with the smallest residual variance was selected for each gene (ER: 205225_at, PR: 208305_at) and used to train a univariate logistic regression model. For HER2, our intent was to mimic the criteria used to direct trastuzumab therapy, but the HER2 status information available from Gene Logic was not detailed enough. We assigned the HER2-positive status to samples with ERBB2 mRNA expression (probe set 216836_s_at) or copy number (by SNP array) at least 2 SD above the mean (Supplementary Fig. S1). These classifiers were used to determine subtype for 10 cell lines and all 51 breast tumors. HER2-positive samples were assigned to the HER2 subtype; HER2-negative samples that were positive for ER or PR were assigned to the ER+/PR+ subtype; and HER2-, ER-, and PR-negative samples were assigned to the triple-negative subtype. Subtype assignment with 370 “intrinsic” genes (10) mapped to the Affymetrix microarray was by hierarchical clustering with Pearson correlation. Samples were also assigned to the higher-resolution subtype (26) for which the gene expression centroid had the highest Spearman correlation.
Analysis of Genome-Wide Copy Number Alterations
The May 2004 human genome release (72) was divided into nonoverlapping 100kb segments. The representative copy number for each of 27,820 segments with at least one SNP was calculated by taking the median GLAD-segmented copy number for the SNPs found therein. The fraction of segments with gains or losses was then counted for a range of gain or loss thresholds. Similar results were observed when the entire genome was divided into 862 cytobands according to the boundaries available in release hg17 of the UCSC genome browser (ref. 73; data not shown). Kruskal-Wallis tests were used to evaluate the association between gain or loss frequency and subtype.
Gene Expression Signatures
Chromosomal instability (CIN25) and RB signatures were calculated as the mean MAS5 expression level for the relevant genes (28, 40) and scaled to have a mean value of 1. The Wilcoxon rank sum test was used to evaluate subtype differences.
Association between Copy Number and Subtypes
The unique set of copy number segment boundaries from all tumor samples was used to define the boundaries of 4,556 genomic intervals. The segmented copy number value within each interval is constant in each tumor sample. For further analysis, 2,714 intervals including at least three SNPs and with absolute log 2 copy number ratio >0.3 in at least five tumors were selected. Association between the copy number alteration in each interval and subtype was evaluated by two-sample t test. False discovery rates were estimated using the q value procedure (74). Intervals with q values <7% were tested by the same analysis procedure in 47 breast cancer cell lines, and the intervals showing consistent association (P < 0.05) were selected.
Identification of Candidate Driver Genes
The regions of most notable copy number gain were identified by multiplying mean gain amplitude by gain frequency (75). Expression levels in samples with and without copy number alteration were compared by two-sided Wilcoxon rank sum test. A log 2 copy number ratio <−0.3 was used to identify samples with losses and a ratio >0.3 was used to identify samples with gains. Association between expression and clinical outcome (time to distant metastasis) was evaluated using the data of van't Veer et al. (29). Their microarray probes were assigned to genes by mapping to the genome with BLAT (76) and finding overlaps with alignments of RefSeq mRNA sequences from UCSC (ref. 73; hg17 release). Within each region the relationship between expression level and time to distant metastasis was estimated by a Cox proportional hazards model and the significance level was calculated by a likelihood ratio test. P value thresholds of 0.05 were used without adjustments for multiple testing. The results of this analysis are limited to prioritizing candidates for follow-up and do not provide statistical evidence that any individual gene is a driver.
Somatic Mutation Data in Breast Cell Lines
Exonic regions were amplified by PCR of genomic DNA and sequenced in both directions using Big Dye Terminator Kit reagents and ABI PRISM 3730xl sequencing machines (Applied Biosystems). Sequence variants were identified using Mutation Surveyor software (SoftGenetics) and confirmed by manual trace review and a second round of sequencing. Matched nontumor samples were not available to confirm that the variants are somatic. Oncogenes tend to be subject to a relatively small number of recurrent activating mutations, and for these genes we only analyzed mutations that have been shown to be somatic in other studies (35). For tumor suppressors, a much wider variety of mutations can impair function, so we considered all variants that do not correspond to any record in dbSNP (77) and that change the amino acid sequence. It is possible that a few of these variants represent novel polymorphisms or functionally insignificant mutations. However, the vast majority correspond to known somatic mutations (35), and most of the rest introduce frameshifts and are likely to result in protein inactivation. Associations between mutation status and subtype were evaluated by two-sided Fisher's exact test.
Western Blotting
Equal amounts of protein were separated by electrophoresis through NuPage Bis-Tris 4% to 12% gradient gels (Invitrogen). Proteins were transferred onto polyvinylidene difluoride membranes using the Criterion system from Bio-Rad. Specific antigen-antibody interaction was detected with a horseradish peroxidase–conjugated secondary antibody IgG using enhanced chemiluminescence Western blotting detection reagents (Amersham Biosciences). The anti-PTEN antibody (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) was used with an anti–glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase antibody (Abcam) as loading control. The anti-MYST2 antibody (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) was used with an anti-actin antibody (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) as loading control. Western blot images were scanned and MYST2 and actin bands were quantitated using Image J software.6
Transient Transfection and Colony Formation Assay
Cells were transfected with pCMV-XL5 expressing MYST2 (Origene) using DharmaFECT 1 (Dharmacon). Seven thousand five hundred cells in growth medium containing 0.4% agarose were seeded in each well of a six-well plate on medium containing 0.8% agarose. Colonies were stained after 3 to 4 wk with 5 mmol/L Calcein AM (Invitrogen) and counted with the ImageXpress Micro system (Molecular Devices).

